Violence and the Sacred by René Girard


Chapters

Sacrifice

The Sacrificial Crisis

Oedipus and the Surrogate Victim

The Origins of Myth and Ritual

Dionysus

From Mimetic Desire to the Monstrous Double

Freud and the Oedipus Complex

Totem and Taboo and the Incest Prohibition

Lévi-Strauss, Structuralism, and Marriage Laws

The Gods, the Dead, the Sacred, and Sacrificial Substitution

The Unity of All Rites


Sacrifice


In many rituals the sacrifical act assumes two opposing aspects, appearing
at times as a sacred obligation to be neglected at grave peril, at other times
as a sort of criminal activity entailing perils of equal gravity.

To account for this dual aspect of ritual sacrifice—the legitimate and the
illegitimate, the public and the all but covert—Henri Hubert and Marcel
Mauss, in their “Essay on the Nature and Function of Sacrifice,”' adduce
the sacred character of the victim. Because the victim is sacred, it is crimi-
nal to kill him—but the victim is sacred only because he is to be killed.
Here is a circular line of reasoning that at a somewhat later date would be
dignified by the sonorous term ambivalence. Persuasive and authoritative
as that term still appears, it has been so extraordinarily abused in our
century that perhaps we may now recognize how little light it sheds on
the subject of sacrifice. Certainly it provides no real explanation. When
we speak of ambivalence, we are only pointing out a problem that
remains to be solved.

If sacrifice resembles criminal violence, we may say that there is,
inversely, hardly any form of violence that cannot be described in terms of
sacrifice—as Greek tragedy clearly reveals. It has often been observed that
the tragic poets cast a glimmering veil of rhetoric over the sordid realities
of life. True enough—but sacrifice and murder would not lend themselves
to this game of reciprocal substitution if they were not in some way
related. Although it is so obvious that it may hardly seem worth mention-
ing, where sacrifice is concerned first appearances count for little, are
quickly brushed aside—and should therefore receive special attention.
Once one has made up one’s mind that sacrifice is an institution essentially
if not entirely symbolic, one can say anything whatsoever about it. It is a
subject that lends itself to insubstantial theorizing.

Sacrifice contains an element of mystery. And if the pieties of classical
humanists lull our curiosity to sleep, the company of the ancient authors
keeps it alert. The ancient mystery remains as impenetrable as ever. From
the manner in which the moderns treat the subject of sacrifice, it would be
hard to know whether distraction, detachment, or some sort of secret
discretion shapes their thinking. There seems to be yet another mystery
here. Why, for example, do we never explore the relationship between
sacrifice and violence?

Recent studies suggest that the physiology of violence varies little from
one individual to another, even from one culture to another. According to
Anthony Storr, nothing resembles an angry cat or man so much as
another angry cat or man.’ If violence did indeed play a role in sacrifice, at
least at one particular stage of the ritual, we would have a significant clue
to the whole subject. Here would be a factor to some extent independent
of those cultural variables that are often unknown to us, or only dimly
known, or perhaps less familiar than we like to think.

Once aroused, the urge to violence triggers certain physical changes
that prepare men’s bodies for battle. This set toward violence lingers on; it
should not be regarded as a simple reflex that ceases with the removal of
the initial stimulus. Storr remarks that it is more difficult to quell an
impulse toward violence than to rouse it, especially within the normal
framework of social behavior.

Violence is frequently called irrational. It has its reasons, however, and
can marshal some rather convincing ones when the need arises. Yet these
reasons cannot be taken seriously, no matter how valid they may appear.
Violence itself will discard them if the initial object remains persistently
out of reach and continues to provoke hostility. When unappeased,
violence seeks and always finds a surrogate victim. The creature that
excited its fury is abruptly replaced by another, chosen only because it is
vulnerable and close at hand.

There are many indications that this tendency to seek out surrogate
objects is not limited to human violence. Konrad Lorenz makes reference
to a species of fish that, if deprived of its natural enemies (the male rivals
with whom it habitually disputes territorial rights), turns its aggression
against the members of its own family and destroys them.’ Joseph de
Maistre discusses the choice of animal victims that display human charac-
teristics—an attempt, as it were, to deceive the violent impulse: “The
sacrificial animals were always those most prized for their usefulness: the
gentlest, most innocent creatures, whose habits and instincts brought
them most closely into harmony with man. ... From the animal realm
were chosen as victims those who were, if we might use the phrase, the
most human in nature.”*

Modem ethnology offers many examples of this sort of intuitive
behavior. In some pastoral communities where sacrifice is practiced, the
cattle are intimately associated with the daily life of the inhabitants.
Two peoples of the Upper Nile, for example—the Nuers, observed by
E. E. Evans-Pritchard, and the Dinka, studied at a somewhat later date by
Godfrey Lienhardt—maintain a bovine society in their midst that parallels
their own and is structured in the same fashion.

The Nuer vocabulary is rich in words describing the ways of cattle and
covering the economic and practical, as well as the poetic and ritualistic,
aspects of these beasts. This wealth of expression makes possible a precise
and finely nuanced relationship between the cattle, on the one hand, and
the human community on the other. The animals’ color, the shape of their
horns, their age, sex, and lineage are all duly noted and remembered,
sometimes as far back as five generations. The cattle are thereby differen-
tiated in such a way as to create a scale of values that approximates
human distinctions and represents a virtual duplicate of human society.
Among the names bestowed on each man is one that also belongs to the
animal whose place in the herd is most similar to the place the man
occupies in the tribe.

The quarrels between various subgroups of the tribes frequently
involve cattle. All fines and interest payments are computed in terms of
head of cattle, and dowries are apportioned in herds. In fact, Evans-
Pritchard maintains that in order to understand the Nuer, one must
“chercher la vache’—“look to the cows.” A sort of “symbiosis” (the term
is also Evans-Pritchard’s) exists between this tribe and their cattle, offer-
ing an extreme and almost grotesque example of the closeness that
characteristically prevails between pastoral peoples and their flocks.

Fieldwork and subsequent theoretical speculation lead us back to the
hypothesis of substitution as the basis for the practice of sacrifice. This
notion pervades ancient literature on the subject—which may be one
reason, in fact, why many modern theorists reject the concept out of hand
or give it only scant attention. Hubert and Mauss, for instance, view the
idea with suspicion, undoubtedly because they feel that it introduces into
the discussion religious and moral values that are incompatible with true
scientific inquiry. And to be sure, Joseph de Maistre takes the view that
the ritual victim is an “innocent” creature who pays a debt for the “guilty”
party. I propose an hypothesis that does away with this moral distinction.
As I see it, the relationship between the potential victim and the actual
victim cannot be defined in terms of innocence or guilt. There is no ques-
tion of “expiation.” Rather, society is seeking to deflect upon a relatively
indifferent victim, a “sacrificeable” victim, the violence that would other-
wise be vented on its own members, the people it most desires to protect.

The qualities that lend violence its particular terror—its blind brutality,
the fundamental absurdity of its manifestations—have a reverse side.
With these qualities goes the strange propensity to seize upon surrogate
victims, to actually conspire with the enemy and at the right moment toss
him a morsel that will serve to satisfy his raging hunger. The fairy tales of
childhood in which the wolf, ogre, or dragon gobbles up a large stone in
place of a small child could well be said to have a sacrifical cast.

Violence is not to be denied, but it can be diverted to another object,
something it can sink its teeth into. Such, perhaps, is one of the meanings
of the story of Cain and Abel. The Bible offers us no background on the
two brothers except the bare fact that Cain is a tiller of the soil who gives
the fruits of his labor to God, whereas Abel is a shepherd who regularly
sacrifices the first-born of his herds. One of the brothers kills the other,
and the murderer is the one who does not have the violence-outlet of
animal sacrifice at his disposal. This difference between sacrificial and
nonsacrificial cults determines, in effect, God’s judgement in favor of
Abel. To say that God accedes to Abel’s sacrificial offerings but rejects the
offerings of Cain is simply another way of saying—from the viewpoint of
the divinity—that Cain is a murderer, whereas his brother is not.

A frequent motif in the Old Testament, as well as in Greek myth, is that
of brothers at odds with one another. Their fatal penchant for violence can
only be diverted by the intervention of a third party, the sacrificial victim
or victims. Cain’s “jealousy” of his brother is only another term for his one
characteristic trait: his lack of a sacrificial outlet.

According to Moslem tradition, God delivered to Abraham the ram
previously sacrificed by Abel. This ram was to take the place of Abraham's
son Isaac; having already saved one human life, the same animal would
now save another. What we have here is no mystical hocuspocus, but an
intuitive insight into the essential function of sacrifice, gleaned exclusively
from the scant references in the Bible.

Another familiar biblical scene takes on new meaning in the light of our
theory of sacrificial substitution, and it can serve in turn to illuminate
some aspects of the theory. The scene is that in which Jacob receives the
blessing of his father Isaac.

Isaac is an old man. He senses the approach of death and summons his
eldest son, Esau, on whom he intends to bestow his final blessing. First,
however, he instructs Esau to bring back some venison from the hunt, so
as to make a “savory meat.” This request is overheard by the younger
brother, Jacob, who hastens to report it to his mother, Rebekah. Rebekah
takes two kids from the family flock, slaughters them, and prepares the
savory meat dish, which Jacob, in the guise of his elder brother, then
presents to his father.

Isaac is blind. Nevertheless Jacob fears he will be recognized, for he is a
“smooth man,” while his brother Esau is a “hairy man.” “My father per-
adventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall
bring a curse upon me, not a blessing.” Rebekah has the idea of covering
Jacob’s hands and the back of his neck with the skins of the slaughtered
goats, and when the old man runs his hands over his younger son, he is
completely taken in by the imposture. Jacob receives the blessing that
Isaac had intended for Esau.

The kids serve in two different ways to dupe the father—or, in other
terms, to divert from the son the violence directed toward him. In order to
receive his father’s blessing rather than his curse, Jacob must present to
Isaac the freshly slaughtered kids made into a “savory meat.” Then the son
must seek refuge, literally, in the skins of the sacrificed animals. The
animals thus interpose themselves between father and son. They serve as
a sort of insulation, preventing the direct contact that could lead only to
violence.

Two sorts of substitution are telescoped here: that of one brother for
another, and that of an animal for a man. Only the first receives explicit
recognition in the text; however, this first one serves as the screen upon
which the shadow of the second is projected.

Once we have focused attention on the sacrificial victim, the object
originally singled out for violence fades from view. Sacrificial substitution
implies a degree of misunderstanding. Its vitality as an institution depends
on its ability to conceal the displacement upon which the rite is based. It
must never lose sight entirely, however, of the original object, or cease to
be aware of the act of transference from that object to the surrogate
victim; without that awareness no substitution can take place and the
sacrifice loses all efficacy. The biblical passage discussed above meets
both requirements. The narrative does not refer directly to the strange
deception underlying the sacrificial substitution, nor does it allow this
deception to pass entirely unnoticed. Rather, it mixes the act of substitu-
tion with another act of substitution, permitting us a fleeting, sidelong
glimpse of the process. The narrative itself, then, might be said to partake
of a sacrificial quality; it claims to reveal one act of substitution while
employing this first substitution to half-conceal another. There is reason
to believe that the narrative touches upon the mythic origins of the
sacrificial system.

The figure of Jacob has long been linked with the devious character of
sacrificial violence. In Greek culture Odysseus plays a similar role. The
story of Jacob’s benediction can be compared to the episode of the Cyclops
in the Odyssey, where a splendidly executed ruse enables the hero to
escape the clutches of a monster.

Odysseus and his shipmates are shut up in the Cyclops’ cave. Every day
the giant devours one of the crew; the survivors finally manage to blind
their tormentor with a flaming stake. Mad with pain and anger, the
Cyclops bars the entrance of the cave to prevent the men from escaping.
However, he lets pass his flock of sheep, which go out daily to pasture. Ina
gesture reminiscent of the blind Isaac, the Cyclops runs his hands over the
back of each sheep as it leaves the cave to make sure that it carries no
passenger. Odysseus, however, has outwitted his captor, and he rides to
freedom by clinging to the thick wool on the underside of one of the rams.

A comparison of the two scenes, one from Genesis and the other from
the Odyssey, lends credence to the theory of their sacrificial origins. In each
case an animal intervenes at the crucial moment to prevent violence from
attaining its designated victim. The two texts are mutually revealing: the
Cyclops of the Odyssey underlines the fearful menace that hangs over the
hero (and that remains obscure in the Genesis story); and the slaughter of
the kids in Genesis, along with the offering of the “savory meat,” clearly
implies the sacrificial character of the flock, an aspect that might go
unnoticed in the Odyssey.

Sacrifice has often been described as an act of mediation between a
sacrificer and a “deity.” Because the very concept of a deity, much less a
deity who receives blood sacrifices, has little reality in this day and age,
the entire institution of sacrifice is relegated by most modern theorists to
the realm of the imagination. The aproach of Hubert and Mauss leads to
the judgement of Claude Lévi-Strauss in La Pensée sauvage: because
sacrificial rites have no basis in reality, we have every reason to label them
meaningless.

The attempt to link sacrifice to a nonexistent deity brings to mind Paul
Valéry’s description of poetry as a purely solipsistic activity practiced by
the more able solely out of love for art, while the less able persist in the
belief that they are actually communicating with someone!

The two ancient narratives examined above make unmistakable
reference to the act of sacrifice, but neither makes so much as a passing
mention of a deity. If a god had intervened in either incident, its signifi-
cance would have been diminished rather than increased, and the reader
would have been led to conclude, in accordance with the beliefs common
to late antiquity and to the modern world, that sacrifice has no real function
in society. Divine intervention would have meant the elimination of the
pervasive aura of dread, along with its firmly structured economy of
violence. We would have then been thrown back upon a formalistic
critical approach that would in no way further our understanding.

As we have seen, the sacrificial process requires a certain degree of
misunderstanding. The celebrants do not and must not comprehend the
true role of the sacrificial act. The theological basis of the sacrifice has a
crucial role in fostering this misunderstanding. It is the god who
supposedly demands the victims; he alone, in principle, who savors the
smoke from the altars and requisitions the slaughtered flesh. It is to
appease his anger that the killing goes on, that the victims multiply. Inter-
preters who think they question the primacy of the divine sufficiently by
declaring the whole affair “imaginary” may well remain the prisoners of
the theology they have not really analyzed. The problem then becomes,
how can a real institution be constructed on a purely illusory basis? It is
not to be wondered at if the outer shell finally gives way, bringing down
with it even the most solid aspects of the institution.

Instead of rejecting the theological basis outright, qua abstraction
(which is the same, in effect, as passively accepting it), let us expose its
assumptions to a critical examination. Let us try to uncover the societal
conflicts that the sacrificial act and its theological interpretations at once
dissimulate and appease. We must break with the formalistic tradition of
Hubert and Mauss.

The interpretation of sacrifice as an act of violence inflicted on a
surrogate victim has recently been advanced once again. Godfrey
Lienhardt (in Divinity and Experience) and Victor Turner (in a number of
works, especially The Drums of Affliction), drawing from fieldwork, portray
sacrifice as practiced among the Dinka and the Ndembu as a deliberate act
of collective substitution performed at the expense of the victim and
absorbing all the internal tensions, feuds, and rivalries pent up within the
community.

Sacrifice plays a very real role in these societies, and the problem of
substitution concerns the entire community. The victim is not a substitute
for some particularly endangered individual, nor is it offered up to some
individual of particularly bloodthirsty temperament. Rather, it is a substi-
tute for all the members of the community, offered up by the members
themselves. The sacrifice serves to protect the entire community from its
own violence; it prompts the entire community to choose victims outside
itself. The elements of dissension scattered throughout the community are
drawn to the person of the sacrificial victim and eliminated, at least
temporarily, by its sacrifice.

If we turn our attention from the theological superstructure of the act—
that is, from an interpretive version of the event that is often accepted as
the final statement on sacrifice—we quickly perceive yet another level of
religious discourse, in theory subordinated to the theological dimension,
but in reality quite independent of it. This has to do with the social
function of the act, an aspect far more accessible to the modern mind.

It is easy to ridicule a religion by concentrating on its more eccentric
rites, rites such as the sacrifices performed to induce rain or bring fine
weather. There is in fact no object or endeavor in whose name a sacrifice
cannot be made, especially when the social basis of the act has begun to
blur. Nevertheless, there is a common denominator that determines the
efficacy of all sacrifices and that becomes increasingly apparent as the
institution grows in vigor. This common denominator is internal vio-
lence—all the dissensions, rivalries, jealousies, and quarrels within the
community that the sacrifices are designed to suppress. The purpose of the
sacrifice is to restore harmony to the community, to reinforce the social
fabric. Everything else derives from that. If once we take this fundamental
approach to sacrifice, choosing the road that violence opens before us, we
can see that there is no aspect of human existence foreign to the subject,
not even material prosperity. When men no longer live in harmony with
one another, the sun still shines and the rain falls, to be sure, but the fields
are less well tended, the harvests less abundant.

The classic literature of China explicitly acknowledges the propitiatory
function of sacrificial rites. Such practices “pacify the country and make
the people settled. ... It is through the sacrifices that the unity of the
people is strengthened” (CH’U YU II, 2). The Book of Rites affirms that
sacrificial ceremonies, music, punishments, and laws have one and the
same end: to unite society and establish order.*

In attempting to formulate the fundamental principles of sacrifice
without reference to the ritualistic framework in which the sacrifice takes
place, we run the risk of appearing simplistic. Such an effort smacks
strongly of “psychologizing.” Clearly, it would be inexact to compare the
sacrificial act to the spontaneous gesture of the man who kicks his dog
because he dares not kick his wife or boss. However, there are Greek
myths that are hardly more than colossal variants of such gestures. Such a
one is the story of Ajax. Furious at the leaders of the Greek army, who
refused to award him Achilles’ weapons, Ajax slaughters the herd of
sheep intended as provisions for the army. In his mad rage he mistakes
these gentle creatures for the warriors on whom he means to vent his
rage. The slaughtered animals belong to a species traditionally utilized by
the Greeks for sacrificial purposes; but because the massacre takes place
outside the ritual framework, Ajax is taken for a madman. The myth is
not, strictly speaking, about the sacrificial process; but it is certainly not
irrelevant to it. The institution of sacrifice is based on effects analogous to
those produced by Ajax’s anger—but structured, channeled and held in
check by fixed laws.

In the ritualistic societies most familiar to us—those of the Jews and of
the Greeks of the classical age—the sacrificial victims are almost always
animals. However, there are other societies in which human victims are
substituted for the individuals who are threatened by violence.

Even in fifth century Greece—the Athens of the great tragedians—
human sacrifice had not, it seems, completely disappeared. The practice
was perpetuated in the form of the pharmakos, maintained by the city at
its own expense and slaughtered at the appointed festivals as well as at a
moment of civic disaster. If examined closely for traces of human sacri-
fice, Greek tragedy offers some remarkable revelations. It is clear, for
example, that the story of Medea parallels that of Ajax on the sacrificial
level, although here we are dealing with human rather than with
animal sacrifice. In Euripides’ Medea the principle of human substitution
of one victim for another appears in its most savage form. Frightened
by the intensity of Medea’s rage against her faithless husband, Jason,
the nurse begs the children’s tutor to keep his charges out of their
mother’s way:
“I am sure her anger will not subside until it has found a victim. Let us pray that
the victim is at least one of our enemies!”

Because the object of her hatred is out of reach, Medea substitutes her
own children. It is difficult for us to see anything resembling a religious act
in Medea’s insane behavior. Nonetheless, infanticide has its place among
ritualistic practices; the practice is too well documented in too many
cultures (including the Jewish and the ancient Greek) for us to exclude it
from consideration here. Medea’s crime is to ritual infanticide what the
massacre of sheep in the Ajax is to animal sacrifice. Medea prepares for
the death of her children like a priest preparing for a sacrifice. Before the
fateful act, she issues the traditional ritual announcement: all those whose
presence might in any way hinder the effectiveness of the ceremony are
requested to remove themselves from the premises.

Medea, like Ajax, reminds us of a fundamental truth about violence; if
left unappeased, violence will accumulate until it overflows its confines
and floods the surrounding area. The role of sacrifice is to stem this rising
tide of indiscriminate substitutions and redirect violence into “proper”
channels.

Ajax has details that underline the close relationship between the
sacrificial substitution of animals and of humans. Before he sets upon the
flock of sheep, Ajax momentarily contemplates the sacrifice of his own
son. The boy’s mother does not take this threat lightly; she whisks the
child away.

In a general study of sacrifice there is little reason to differentiate
between human and animal victims. When the principle of the substitu-
tion is physical resemblance between the vicarious victim and its prototypes,
the mere fact that both victims are human beings seems to suffice. Thus, it
is hardly surprising that in some societies whole categories of human
beings are systematically reserved for sacrificial purposes in order to
protect other categories.

I do not mean to minimize the gap that exists between the societies
that practice human sacrifice and those that do not. However, this gap
should not prevent us from perceiving what they have in common.
Strictly speaking, there is no essential difference between animal sacri-
fice and human sacrifice, and in many cases one is substituted for the
other. Our tendency to insist on differences that have little reality when
discussing the institution of sacrifice—our reluctance, for example, to
equate animal with human sacrifice—is undoubtedly a factor in the
extraordinary misunderstandings that still persist in that area of human
culture.

This reluctance to consider all forms of sacrifice as a single phenomenon
is nothing new. Joseph de Maistre, having defined the principle of sacri-
ficial substitution, makes the bold and wholly unsubstantiated assertion
that this principle does not apply to human sacrifice. One cannot, he
insists, kill a man to save a man. Yet this assertion is repeatedly contra-
dicted by Greek tragedy, implicitly in a play like Medea, and explicitly
elsewhere in Euripides.

In Euripides’ Electra, Clytemnestra explains that the sacrifice of
her daughter Iphigenia would have been justified ifit had been performed
to save human lives. The tragedian thus enlightens us, by way of
Clytemnestra, on the “normal” function of human sacrifice—the function
de Maistre had refused to acknowledge. If, says Clytemnestra,
Agamemnon had permitted his daughter to die:

...in order to prevent the sack of the city, to help his home, to rescue his
children, sacrificing one to save the others, I could then have pardoned him.
But for the sake of brazen Helen ...!

Without ever expressly excluding the subject of human sacrifice from
their research—and indeed, on what grounds could they do so?—modern
scholars, notably Hubert and Mauss, mention it but rarely in their theor-
etical discussions. On the other hand, the scholars who do concern them-
selves with human sacrifice tend to concentrate on it to the exclusion of
everything else, dwelling at length on the “sadistic” or “barbarous” aspects
of the custom. Here, again, one particular form of sacrifice is isolated from
the subject as a whole.

This dividing of sacrifice into two categories, human and animal, has
itself a sacrificial character, in a strictly ritualistic sense. The division is
based in effect on a value judgement, on the preconception that one
category of victim—the human being—is quite unsuitable for sacrificial
purposes, while another category—the animal—is eminently sacrific-
cable. We encounter here a survival of the sacrificial mode of thinking
that perpetuates a misunderstanding about the institution as a whole. It is
not a question of rejecting the value judgment on which this misunder-
standing is based, but of putting it, so to speak, in parentheses, of recogniz-
ing that as far as the institution is concerned, such judgments are purely
arbitrary. All reduction into categories, whether implicit or explicit, must
be avoided; all victims, animal or human, must be treated in the same
fashion if we wish to apprehend the criteria by which victims are selected
(if indeed such criteria exist) and discover (if such a thing is possible) a
universal principle for their selection.

We have remarked that all victims, even the animal ones, bear a certain
resemblance to the object they replace; otherwise the violent impulse
would remain unsatisfied. But this resemblance must not be carried to the
extreme of complete assimilation, or it would lead to disastrous confusion.
In the case of animal victims the difference is always clear, and no such
confusion is possible. Although they do their best to empathize with their
cattle, the Nuers never quite manage to mistake a man for a cow—the
proof being that they always sacrifice the latter, never the former. Iam not
lapsing into the trap of Lévy Bruhl’s “primitive mentality.” Iam not saying
that primitive man is less capable of making distinctions than we
modems.

In order for a species or category of living creature, human or animal, to
appear suitable for sacrifice, it must bear a sharp resemblance to the
human categories excluded from the ranks of the “sacrificeable,” while still
maintaining a degree of difference that forbids all possible confusion. As I
have said, no mistake is possible in the case of animal sacrifice. But it is
quite another case with human victims. If we look at the extremely wide
spectrum of human victims sacrificed by various societies, the list seems
heterogeneous, to say the least. It includes prisoners of war, slaves, small
children, unmarried adolescents, and the handicapped; it ranges from the
very dregs of society, such as the Greek pharmakos, to the king himself.

Is it possible to detect a unifying factor in this disparate group? We
notice at first glance beings who are either outside or on the fringes of
society: prisoners of war, slaves, pharmakos. In many primitive societies
children who have not yet undergone the rites of initiation have no
proper place in the community; their rights and duties are almost non-
existent. What we are dealing with, therefore, are exterior or marginal
individuals, incapable of establishing or sharing the social bonds that link
the rest of the inhabitants. Their status as foreigners or enemies, their
servile condition, or simply their age prevents these future victims from
fully integrating themselves into the community.

But what about the king? Is he not at the very heart of the community?
Undoubtedly—but it is precisely his position at the center that serves to
isolate him from his fellow men, to render him casteless. He escapes from
society, so to speak, via the roof, just as the pharmakos escapes through
the cellar. The king has a sort of foil, however, in the person of his fool.
The fool shares his master’s status as an outsider—an isolation whose
literal truth is often of greater significance than the easily reversible sym-
bolic values often attributed to it. From every point of view the fool is
eminently “sacrificcable,” and the king can use him to vent his own anger.
But it sometimes happens that the king himself is sacrificed, and that
(among certain African societies) in a thoroughly regulated and highly
ritualistic manner.*

It is clearly legitimate to define the difference between sacrificeable
and nonsacrificeable individuals in terms of their degree of integration,
but such a definition is not yet sufficient. In many cultures women are
not considered full-fledged members of their society; yet women are
never, or rarely, selected as sacrificial victims. There may be a simple
explanation for this fact. The married woman retains her ties with her
parents’ clan even after she has become in some respects the property of
her husband and his family. To kill her would be to run the risk of one of
the two groups’ interpreting her sacrifice as an act of murder committing
it to a reciprocal act of revenge. The notion of vengeance casts a new
light on the matter. All our sacrificial victims, whether chosen from one
of the human categories enumerated above or, a fortiori, from the animal
realm, are invariably distinguishable from the nonsacrificeable beings by
one essential characteristic: between these victims and the community a
crucial social link is missing, so they can be exposed to violence without
fear of reprisal. Their death does not automatically entail an act of
vengeance.

The considerable importance this freedom from reprisal has for the
sacrificial process makes us understand that sacrifice is primarily an act of
violence without risk of vengeance. We also understand the paradox—not
without its comic aspects on occasion—of the frequent references to
vengeance in the course of sacrificial rites, the veritable obsession with
vengeance when no chance of vengeance exists:

For the act they were about to commit elaborate excuses were offered; they
shuddered at the prospect of the sheep’s death, they wept over it as though
they were its parents. Before the blow was struck, they implored the beast’s
forgiveness. They then addressed themselves to the species to which the beast
belonged, as if addressing a large family clan, beseeching it not to seek ven-
geance for the act that was about to be inflicted on one of its members. In the
same vein the actual murderer was punished in some manner, either beaten or
sent into exile.’

It is the entire species considered as a large family clan that the sacrificers
beseech not to seek vengeance. By incorporating the element of reprisal
into the ceremony, the participants are hinting broadly at the true func-
tion of the rite, the kind of action it was designed to circumvent and the
criteria that determined the choice of victim. The desire to commit an act
of violence on those near us cannot be suppressed without a conflict;
we must divert that impulse, therefore, toward the sacrificial victim, the
creature we can strike down without fear of reprisal, since he lacks a
champion.

Like everything that touches on the essential nature of the sacrificial
act, the true distinction between the sacrificeable and the nonsacrificeable
is never clearly articulated. Oddities and inexplicable anomalies confuse
the picture. For instance, some animal species will be formally excluded
from sacrifice, but the exclusion of members of the community is never
mentioned. In constantly drawing attention to the truly maniacal aspects
of sacrifice, modern theorists only serve to perpetuate an old misunder-
standing in new terms. Men can dispose of their violence more efficiently
if they regard the process not as something emanating from within them-
selves, but as a necessity imposed from without, a divine decree whose
least infraction calls down terrible punishment. When they banish sacri-
ficial practices from the “real,” everyday world, modern theorists continue
to misrepresent the violence of sacrifice.

The function of sacrifice is to quell violence within the community and
to prevent conflicts from erupting. Yet societies like our own, which do
not, strictly speaking, practice sacrificial rites, seem to get along without
them. Violence undoubtedly exists within our society, but not to such an
extent that the society itself is threatened with extinction. The simple fact
that sacrificial practices, and other rites as well, can disappear without
catastrophic results should in part explain the failure of ethnology and
theology to come to grips with these cultural phenomena, and explain as
well our modern reluctance to attribute a real function to them. After all,
it is hard to maintain that institutions for which, as it seems, we have no
need are actually indispensable.

It may be that a basic difference exists between a society like ours and
societies imbued with religion—a difference that is partially hidden from
us by rites, particularly by rites of sacrifice, that play a compensatory role.
This difference would help explain why the actual function of sacrifice still
eludes us.

When internal strife, previously sublimated by means of sacrificial
practices, rises to the surface, it manifests itself in interfamily vendettas or
blood feuds. This kind of violence is virtually nonexistent in our own
culture. And perhaps it is here that we should look for the fundamental
difference between primitive societies and our own; we should examine
the specific ailments to which we are immune and which sacrifice
manages to control, if not to eliminate.

Why does the spirit of revenge, wherever it breaks out, constitute such
an intolerable menace? Perhaps because the only satisfactory revenge for
spilt blood is spilling the blood of the killer; and in the blood feud there is
no clear distinction between the act for which the killer is being punished
and the punishment itself. Vengeance professes to be an act of reprisal,
and every reprisal calls for another reprisal. The crime to which the act of
vengeance addresses itself is almost never an unprecedented offense; in
almost every case it has been committed in revenge for some prior crime.

Vengeance, then, is an interminable, infinitely repetitive process. Every
time it turns up in some part of the community, it threatens to involve the
whole social body. There is the risk that the act of vengeance will initiate a
chain reaction whose consequences will quickly prove fatal to any society
of modest size. The multiplication of reprisals instantaneously puts the
very existence of a society in jeopardy, and that is why it is universally
proscribed.

Curiously enough, it is in the very communities where the proscription
is most strictly enforced that vengeance seems to hold sway. Even when it
remains in the background, its role in the community unacknowledged,
the specter of vengeance plays an important role in shaping the relation-
ships among individuals. That is not to say that the prohibition against acts
of vengeance is taken lightly. Precisely because murder inspires horror
and because men must be forcibly restrained from murder, vengeance is
inflicted on all those who commit it. The obligation never to shed blood
cannot be distinguished from the obligation to exact vengeance on those
who shed it. If men wish to prevent an interminable outbreak of ven-
geance (just as today we wish to prevent nuclear war), it isnot enough to
convince their fellows that violence is detestable—for it is precisely
because they detest violence that men make a duty of vengeance.

In a world still haunted by the specter of vengeance it is difficult to
theorize about vengeance without resorting to equivocations or para-
doxes. In Greek tragedy, for instance, there is not—and cannot be—any
consistent stand on the subject. To attempt to extract a coherent theory of
vengeance from the drama is to miss the essence of tragedy. For in tragedy
each character passionately embraces or rejects vengeance depending
on the position he occupies at any given moment in the scheme of the
drama.

Vengeance is a vicious circle whose effect on primitive societies can only
be surmised. For us the circle has been broken. We owe our good fortune
to one of our social institutions above all: our judicial system, which
serves to deflect the menace of vengeance. The system does not suppress
vengeance; rather, it effectively limits it to a single act of reprisal, enacted
by a sovereign authority specializing in this particular function. The
decisions of the judiciary are invariably presented as the final word on
vengeance.

Vocabulary is perhaps more revealing here than judicial theories. Once
the concept of interminable revenge has been formally rejected, it is
referred to as private vengeance. The term implies the existence of a public
vengeance, a counterpart never made explicit. By definition, primitive
societies have only private vengeance. Thus, public vengeance is the
exclusive property of well-policed societies, and our society calls it the
judicial system.

Our penal system operates according to principles of justice that are in
no real conflict with the concept of revenge. The same principle is at
work in all systems of violent retribution. Either the principle is just, and
justice is therefore inherent in the idea of vengeance, or there is no
justice to be found anywhere. He who exacts his own vengeance is said
to “take the law into his own hands.” There is no difference of principle
between private and public vengeance; but on the social level, the differ-
ence is enormous. Under the public system, an act of vengeance is
no longer avenged; the process is terminated, the danger of escalation
averted.

The absence of a judicial system in primitive societies has been
confirmed by ethnologists. Malinowski concludes that “the ‘criminal’
aspect of law in savage communities is perhaps even vaguer than the
civil one; the idea of ‘justice’ in our sense [is] hardly applicable and the
means of restoring a disturbed tribal equilibrium [are] slow and
cumbersome.”!

Radcliffe-Brown’s conclusions are identical, and summon up, as such
conclusions must, the specter of perpetual vengeance: “Thus, though the
Andaman Islanders had a well-developed social conscience, that is, a
system of moral notions as to what is right and wrong, there was no such
thing as punishment of a crime by the society. If one person injured
another it was left to the injured one to seek vengeance if he wished and
if he dared. There were probably always some who would side with the
criminal, their attachment to him overcoming their disapproval of his
actions.”!

The anthropologist Robert Lowie speaks of the “administering of
justice” in reference to primitive societies. He distinguishes two types of
societies, those that possess a “central authority,” and those that do not.
Among the latter it is the parental group, he declares, that exercises the
judicial power, and this group confronts the other group in the same way that a
sovereign state confronts the outside world. There can be no true “administer-
ing of justice,” no judicial system without a superior tribunal capable of
arbitrating between even the most powerful groups. Only that superior
tribunal can remove the possibility of blood feud or perpetual vendetta.
Lowie himself recognizes that this condition is not always met: “From the
supreme law of group solidarity it follows that when an individual has
injured a member of another group, his own group shield him while the
opposing group support the injured man’s claims for compensation or
revenge. Thence there may develop blood-feuds and civil wars. ... The
Chukchi generally make peace after the first act of retribution, but among
the Ifugao the struggle may go on almost interminably. . . .”’”

To speak here of the “administering of justice” is to abuse the meaning
of the words. The desire to find in primitive societies virtues equal or
superior to our own as regards the control of violence must not lead us to
minimize the differences. Lowie’s terminology simply perpetuates a
widely accepted way of thinking by which the right to vengeance takes the
place of a judicial system wherever such a system is lacking. This theory,
which seems securely anchored to common sense, is in fact erroneous
and gives rise to an infinite number of errors. Such thinking reflects the
ignorance of a society—our own—that has been the beneficiary of a
judicial system for so many years that it is no longer conscious of the
system's real achievements.

If vengeance is an unending process it can hardly be invoked to restrain
the violent impulses of society. In fact, it is vengeance itself that must be
restrained. Lowie bears witness to the truth of this proposition every time
he gives an example of the “administering of justice,” even in those soci-
eties that, according to him, possess a “central authority.” It is not the lack
of any abstract principle of justice that is important, but the fact that the
so-called legal reprisals are always in the hands of the victims themselves
and those near to them. As long as there exists no sovereign and
independent body capable of taking the place of the injured party and
taking upon itself the responsibility for revenge, the danger of intermin-
able escalation remains. Efforts to modify the punishment or to hold
vengeance in check can only result in a situation that is precarious at best.
Such efforts ultimately require a spirit of conciliation that may indeed be
present, but may equally well be lacking. As I have said, it is inexact
to speak of the administering of justice, even in connection with such
institutional concepts as “an eye for an eye” or the various forms of trial by
combat. In such cases it seems wise to adhere to Malinowski’s conclusion:
“The means of restoring a disturbed tribal equilibrium [are] slow and
cumbersome. ... We have not found any arrangement or usage which
could be classed as a form of ‘administration of justice,’ according to a
code and by fixed methods.” *

If primitive societies have no tried and true remedies for dealing with an
outbreak of violence, no certain cure once the social equilibrium has been
upset, we can assume that preventive measures will play an essential role.
Here again I return to the concept of sacrifice as I earlier defined it: an
instrument of prevention in the struggle against violence.

In a universe where the slightest dispute can lead to disaster—just as a
slight cut can prove fatal to a hemophiliac—the rites of sacrifice serve to
polarize the community’s aggressive impulses and redirect them toward
victims that may be actual or figurative, animate or inanimate, but that
are always incapable of propagating further vengeance. The sacrificial
process furnishes an outlet for those violent impulses that cannot be
mastered by self-restraint; a partial outlet, to be sure, but always renew-
able, and one whose efficacy has been attested by an impressive number
of reliable witnesses. The sacrificial process prevents the spread of
violence by keeping vengeance in check.

In societies that practice sacrifice there is no critical situation to which
the rites are not applicable, but there are certain crises that seem to be
particularly amenable to sacrificial mediation. In these crises the social
fabric of the community is threatened; dissension and discord are rife.
The more critical the situation, the more “precious” the sacrificial victim
must be.

It is significant that sacrifice has languished in societies with a firmly
established judicial system—ancient Greece and Rome, for example. In
such societies the essential purpose of sacrifice has disappeared. It may
still be practiced for a while, but in diminished and debilitated form. And it
is precisely under such circumstances that sacrifice usually comes to our
notice, and our doubts as to the “real” function of religious institutions
are only reinforced.

Our original proposition stands: ritual in general, and sacrificial rites
in particular, assume essential roles in societies that lack a firm judicial
system. It must not be assumed, however, that sacrifice simply “replaces”
a judicial system. One can scarcely speak of replacing something that
never existed to begin with. Then, too, a judicial system is ultimately
irreplaceable, short of a unanimous and entirely voluntary renunciation
of all violent actions.

When we minimize the dangers implicit in vengeance we risk losing
sight of the true function of sacrifice. Because revenge is rarely
encountered in our society, we seldom have occasion to consider how
societies lacking a judicial system of punishment manage to hold it
in check. Our ignorance engages us in a false line of thought that is
seldom, if ever, challenged. Certainly we have no need of religion to help
us solve a problem, runaway vengeance, whose very existence eludes
us. And because we have no need for it, religion itself appears sense-
less. The efficiency of our judicial solution conceals the problem, and
the elimination of the problem conceals from us the role played by
religion.

The air of mystery that primitive societies acquire for us is undoubtedly
due in large part to this misunderstanding. It is undoubtedly responsible
for our extreme views of these societies, our insistence on portraying
them alternately as vastly superior or flagrantly inferior to our own. One
factor alone might well be responsible for our oscillation between
extremes, our radical evaluations: the absence in such societies of a
judicial system. No one can assess with certainty the amount of violence
present in another individual, much less in another society. We can be
sure, however, that in a society lacking a judicial system the violence will
not appear in the same places or take the same forms as in our own. We
generally limit our area of inquiry to the most conspicuous and accessible
aspects of these societies. Thus, it is not unnatural that they should seem
to us either horribly barbarous or blissfully utopian.

In primitive societies the risk of unleashed violence is so great and the
cure so problematic that the emphasis naturally falls on prevention. The
preventive measures naturally fall within the domain of religion, where
they can on occasion assume a violent character. Violence and the sacred
are inseparable. But the covert appropriation by sacrifice of certain
properties of violence—particularly the ability of violence to move from
one object to another—is hidden from sight by the awesome machinery of ritual.

Primitive societies are not given over to violence. Nor are they
necessarily less violent or less “hypocritical” than our own society. Of
course, to be truly comprehensive we ought to take into consideration ail
forms of violence, more or less ritualized, that divert a menace from
nearby objects to more distant objects. We ought, for instance, to consider
war. War is clearly not restricted to one particular type of society. Yet the
multiplication of new weapons and techniques does not constitute a
fundamental difference between primitive and modern warfare. On the
other hand, if we compare societies that adhere to a judicial system with
societies that practise sacrificial rites, the difference between the two is
such that we can indeed consider the absence or presence of these institu-
tions as a basis for distinguishing primitive societies from “civilized” ones.
These are the institutions we must scrutinize in order to arrive, not at
some sort of value judgement, but at an objective knowledge of the
respective societies to which they belong.

In primitive societies the exercise of preventive measures is not
confined exclusively to the domain of religion. The way in which these
measures are made manifest in normal social intercourse made a lasting
impression on the minds and imaginations of the first European observers
and established a prototype of “primitive” psychology and behavior
which, if not universally applicable, is still not wholly illusory.

When the least false step can have dire consequences, human relation-
ships may well be marked by a prudence that seems to us excessive and
accompanied by precautions that appear incomprehensible. It is in this
sense that we must understand the lengthy palavers that precede any
undertaking not sanctified by custom, in this sense that we must under-
stand primitive man’s reluctance to engage in nonritualized games or
contests. In a society where every action or gesture may have irreparable
consequences it is not surprising that the members should display a
“noble gravity” of bearing beside which our own demeanor appears
ridiculous. The commercial, administrative, or ideological concerns that
make such overwhelming demands on our time and attention seem
utterly frivolous in comparison to primitive man’s primary concerns.

Primitive societies do not have built into their structure an automatic
brake against violence; but we do, in the form of powerful institutions
whose grip grows progressively tighter as their role grows progressively
less apparent. The constant presence of a restraining force allows modern
man safely to transgress the limits imposed on primitive peoples without
even being aware of the fact. In “policed” societies the relationships
between individuals, including total strangers, is characterized by an
extraordinary air of informality, flexibility, and even audacity.

Religion invariably strives to subdue violence, to keep it from running
wild. Paradoxically, the religious and moral authorities in a community
attempt to instill nonviolence, as an active force into daily life and as a
mediating force into ritual life, through the application of violence. Sacri-
ficial rites serve to connect the moral and religious aspects of daily life, but
only by means of a lengthy and hazardous detour. Moreover, it must be
kept in mind that the efficacy of the rites depends on their being
performed in the spirit of pietas, which marks all aspects of religious life.
We are beginning to understand why the sacrificial act appears as both
sinful and saintly, an illegal as well as a legitimate exercise of violence.
However, we are still far from a full understanding of the act itself.

Primitive religion tames, trains, arms, and directs violent impulses as a
defensive force against those forms of violence that society regards as
inadmissible. It postulates a strange mixture of violence and nonviolence.
The same can perhaps be said of our own judicial system of control.

There may be a certain connection between all the various methods
employed by man since the beginning of time to avoid being caught up in
an interminable round of revenge. They can be grouped into three general
categories: (1) preventive measures in which sacrificial rites divert the
spirit of revenge into other channels; (2) the harnessing or hobbling of
vengeance by means of compensatory measures, trials by combat, etc.,
whose curative effects remain precarious; (3) the establishment of a
judicial system—the most efficient of all curative procedures.

We have listed the methods in ascending order of effectiveness. The
evolution from preventive to curative procedures is reflected in the course
of history or, at any rate, in the course of the history of the Western world.
The initial curative procedures mark an intermediary stage between a
purely religious orientation and the recognition of a judicial system’s
superior efficiency. These methods are inherently ritualistic in character,
and are often associated with sacrificial practices.

The curative procedures employed by primitive societies appear
rudimentary to us. We tend to regard them as fumbling efforts to impro-
vise a judicial system. Certainly their pragmatic aspects are clearly visible,
oriented as they are not toward the guilty parties, but toward the
victims—since it is the latter who pose the most immediate threat. The injured
parties must be accorded a careful measure of satisfaction, just
enough to appease their own desire for revenge but not so much as to
awaken the desire elsewhere. It is not a question of codifying good and
evil or of inspiring respect for some abstract concept of justice; rather, it
is a question of securing the safety of the group by checking the impulse
for revenge. The preferred method involves a reconciliation between
parties based on some sort of mutual compensation. If reconciliation is
impossible, however, an armed encounter can be arranged in such a
manner that the violence is wholly self-contained. This encounter can
take place within an enclosed space and can involve prescribed regu-
lations and specifically designated combatants. Its purpose is to cut
violence short.

To be sure, all these curative measures are steps in the direction of a
legal system. But the evolution, if indeed evolution is the proper term, is
not continuous. The break comes at the moment when the intervention
of an independent legal authority becomes constraining. Only then are
men freed from the terrible obligations of vengeance. Retribution in its
judicial guise loses its terrible urgency. Its meaning remains the same, but
this meaning becomes increasingly indistinct or even fades from view. In
fact, the system functions best when everyone concerned is least aware
that it involves retribution. The system can—and as soon as it can it will—
reorganize itself around the accused and the concept of guilt. In fact,
retribution still holds sway, but forged into a principle of abstract justice
that all men are obliged to uphold and respect.

We have seen that the “curative” measures, ostensibly designed to
temper the impulse toward vengeance, become increasingly mysterious
in their workings as they progress in efficiency. As the focal point of the
system shifts away from religion and the preventive approach is translated
into judicial retribution, the aura of misunderstanding that has always
formed a protective veil around the institution of sacrifice shifts as well,
and becomes associated in turn with the machinery of the law.

As soon as the judicial system gains supremacy, its machinery
disappears from sight. Like sacrifice, it conceals—even as it also reveals—
its resemblance to vengeance, differing only in that it is not self-
perpetuating and its decisions discourage reprisals. In the case of sacrifice,
the designated victim does not become the object of vengeance because
he is a replacement, is not the “right” victim. In the judicial system the
violence does indeed fall on the “right” victim; but it falls with such force,
such resounding authority, that no retort is possible.

It can be argued that the function of the judicial system is not really
concealed; and we can hardly be unaware that the judicial process is
more concerned with the general security of the community than with
any abstract notion of justice. Nonetheless, we believe that the system is
founded on a unique principle of justice unknown to primitive societies.
The scholarly literature on the subject seems to bear out this belief. It
has long been assumed that a decisive difference between primitive and
civilized man is the former’s general inability to identify the guilty party
and to adhere to the principle of guilt. Such an assumption only con-
fuses the issue. If primitive man insists on averting his attention from
the wrongdoer, with an obstinacy that strikes us as either idiotic or per-
verse, it is because he wishes above all to avoid fueling the fires of
vengeance.

If our own system seems more rational, it is because it conforms more
strictly to the principle of vengeance. Its insistence on the punishment of
the guilty party underlines this fact. Instead of following the example of
religion and attempting to forestall acts of revenge, to mitigate or sabotage
its effects or to redirect them to secondary objects, our judicial system
rationalizes revenge and succeeds in limiting and isolating its effects in
accordance with social demands. The system treats the disease without
fear of contagion and provides a highly effective technique for the cure
and, as a secondary effect, the prevention of violence.

This rationalistic approach to vengeance might seem to stem from a
peculiarly intimate relationship between the community and the judicial
system. In fact, it is the result not of any familiar interchange between
the two, but of the recognition of the sovereignty and independence of
the judiciary, whose decisions no group, not even the collectivity as a
body, can challenge. (At least, that is the principle.) The judicial author-
ity is beholden to no one. It is thus at the disposal of everyone, and it is
universally respected. The judicial system never hesitates to confront
violence head on, because it possesses a monopoly on the means of
revenge. Thanks to this monopoly, the system generally succeeds in
stifling the impulse to vengeance rather than spreading or aggravating
it, as a similar intervention on the part of the aggrieved party would
invariably do.

In the final analysis, then, the judicial system and the institution of
sacrifice share the same function, but the judicial system is infinitely more
effective. However, it can only exist in conjunction with a firmly estab-
lished political power. And like all modern technological advances, it is a two-edged sword,
which can be used to oppress as well as to liberate.
Certainly that is the way it is seen by primitive cultures, whose view on
the matter is indubitably more objective than our own.

If the function of the system has now become apparent, that is because
it no longer enjoys the obscurity it needs to operate effectively. A clear
view of the inner workings indicates a crisis in the system; it is a sign of
disintegration. No matter how sturdy it may seem, the apparatus that
serves to hide the true nature of legal and illegal violence from view
eventually wears thin. The underlying truth breaks through, and we find
ourselves face to face with the specter of reciprocal reprisal. This is not a
purely theoretical concept belonging to the intellectual and scholarly
realm, but a sinister reality; a vicious circle we thought we had escaped,
but one we find has tightened itself, all unsuspected, around us.

The procedures that keep men’s violence in bounds have one thing in
common: they are no strangers to the ways of violence. There is reason to
believe that they are all rooted in religion. As we have seen, the various
forms of prevention go hand in hand with religious practices. The curative
procedures are also imbued with religious concepts—both the rudimen-
tary sacrificial rites and the more advanced judicial forms. Religion in
its broadest sense, then, must be another term for that obscurity that
surrounds man’s efforts to defend himself by curative or preventative
means against his own violence. It is that enigmatic quality that pervades
the judicial system when that system replaces sacrifice. This obscurity
coincides with the transcendental effectiveness of a violence that is holy,
legal, and legitimate successfully opposed to a violence that is unjust,
illegal, and illegitimate.

In the same way that sacrificial victims must in principle meet the
approval of the divinity before being offered as a sacrifice, the judicial
system appeals to a theology as a guarantee of justice. Even when this
theology disappears, as has happened in our culture, the transcendental
quality of the system remains intact. Centuries can pass before men
realize that there is no real difference between their principle of justice
and the concept of revenge.

Only the transcendental quality of the system, acknowledged by all, can
assure the prevention or cure of violence. This is the case no matter what
the consecrating institution may be. Only by opting for a sanctified, legiti-
mate form of violence and preventing it from becoming an object of
disputes and recriminations can the system save itself from the vicious
circle of revenge.

A unique generative force exists that we can only qualify as religious in
a sense deeper than the theological one. It remains concealed and draws
its strength from this concealment, even as its self-created shelter begins
to crumble. The acknowledgment of such a force allows us to assess our
modern ignorance—ignorance in regard to violence as well as religion.
Religion shelters us from violence just as violence seeks shelter in religion.
If we fail to understand certain religious practices it is not because we are
outside their sphere of influence but because we are still to a very real
extent enclosed within them. The solemn debates on the death of God and
of man are perhaps beside the point. They remain theological at bottom,
and by extension sacrificial; that is, they draw a veil over the subject of
vengeance, which threatens to become quite real once again, in the form
not ofa philosophical debate but of unlimited violence, in a world with no
absolute values. As soon as the essential quality of transcendence—
religious, humanistic, or whatever—is lost, there are no longer any terms
by which to define the legitimate form of violence and to recognize it
among the multitude of illicit forms. The definition of legitimate and
illegitimate forms then becomes a matter of mere opinion, with each man
free to reach his own decision. In other words, the question is thrown to
the winds. Henceforth there are as many legitimate forms of violence as
there are men to implement them; legitimacy as a principle no longer
exists. Only the introduction of some transcendental quality that will per-
suade men of the fundamental difference between sacrifice and revenge,
between a judicial system and vengeance, can succeed in by-passing
violence.

All this explains why our penetration and demystification of the system
necessarily coincides with the disintegration of that system. The act of
demystification retains a sacrificial quality and remains essentially
religious in character for at least as long as it fails to come to a conclu-
sion—as long, that is, as the process purports to be nonviolent, or less
violent than the system itself. In fact, demystification leads to constantly
increasing violence, a violence perhaps less “hypocritical” than the
violence it seeks to expose, but more energetic, more virulent, and the
harbinger of something far worse—a violence that knows no bounds.

While acknowledging the differences, both functional and mythical,
between vengeance, sacrifice, and legal punishment, it is important to
recognize their fundamental identity. Precisely because these three
institutions are essentially the same they tend to adopt the same types of
violent response in times of crisis. Seen in the abstract, such an assertion
may seem hyperbolic or simply unbelievable. It can only be appreciated
by means of concrete examples. Only then will the utility of the com-
parison become apparent; customs and institutions that have remained
incomprehensible, unclassifiable, and “aberrant” heretofore make sense
when seen in the light of this identity.

Robert Lowie, discussing collective reactions to an act of violence,
brings out a fact well worth noting here: “The Chukchi generally make
peace after the first act of retribution. ... While the Ifugao tend to protect
a kinsman under almost all circumstances, the Chukchi often avert a feud
by killing a member of the family.”

Whether it be through sacrificial killing or legal punishment, the
problem is to forestall a series of reprisals. As the above quotation shows,
Lowie is well aware of this aspect. In killing one of their own, the Chukchi
abort the issue; by offering a victim to their potential enemies they enjoin
them not to seek vengeance, not to commit an act that would constitute a
fresh affront and oblige the other side to seek further retribution. This
expiatory procedure brings to mind the sacrificial process; the fact that the
victim is someone other than the guilty party drives the resemblance
home.

The Chukchi practice cannot, however, be classified as sacrificial. A
properly conducted ritual killing is never openly linked to another blood-
letting of irregular character. It never allows itself to pass as a deliberate
act of retribution. Because this link is consistently missing, the meaning of
the sacrificial process has always eluded us, and the relationship between
sacrifice and violence has remained obscure. Now the meaning is made
clear, and in a manner too spectacular for the act to be mistaken for mere
ritual.

Should one then classify this custom among legal punishments? Can
one properly refer to it as an “execution of justice?” Probably not; after all,
the victim of the second murder was in no way responsible for the first. To
be sure, Lowie invokes the concept of “collective responsibility,” but this is
not a satisfactory explanation. Collective responsibility never specifically
excludes the true culprit, and that is precisely what is being done here.
Even if this exclusion is not clearly spelled out, there is sufficient evidence
for us to assume that in many instances the true culprit is systematically
spared. As a cultural attitude, this certainly demands attention.

To refer in this context to the so-called primitive mentality, to some
“possible confusion between the individual and the group,” is to hedge
the issue. If the Chukchi choose to spare the culprit it is not because they
cannot distinguish where the guilt lies. On the contrary, they perceive it
with the utmost clarity. It is precisely because they see that the guilty
party is guilty that they choose to spare him. The Chukchi believe that
they have good reasons to act as they do, and it is these reasons we must
now examine.

To make a victim out of the guilty party is to play vengeance’s role, to
submit to the demands of violence. By killing, not the murderer himself,
but someone close to him, an act of perfect reciprocity is avoided and the
necessity for revenge by-passed. If the counterviolence were inflicted on
the aggressor himself, it would by this very act participate in, and become
indistinguishable from, the original act of violence. In short, it would
become an act of pure vengeance, requiring yet another act of vengeance
and transforming itself into the very thing it was designed to prevent.

Only violence can put an end to violence, and that is why violence is
self-propagating. Everyone wants to strike the last blow, and reprisal can
thus follow reprisal without any true conclusion ever being reached.

In excluding the actual guilty party from reprisals the Chukchi hope to
avoid the vicious cycle of revenge. They try to cover their tracks—but not
entirely, for they do not want to deprive their act of its primordial mean-
ing as a response to an initial killing, as the payment of a debt contracted
by one of their number. To quell the passions aroused by this crime an act
is required that bears some resemblance to the vengeance sought by the
plaintiffs but that does not quite qualify as an act of revenge. The act
resembles both a legal punishment and a sacrifice, and yet it cannot be
assimilated to either. The act described here resembles a legal punishment
in that it constitutes an act of reparation, a violent retribution; and the
Chukchi show no hesitation in imposing on themselves the same loss they
have inflicted on others. Their action resembles a sacrifice in that the
victim of the second murder is not responsible for the first.

So flagrant a disregard of the principle of guilt strikes us as absurd. We
hold that principle in such high esteem that any deviation from it appears
to us an aberration of the intellect or malfunction of the senses. Yet our
line of reasoning is rejected by the “primitives” because it involves too
strict an application of the doctrine of vengeance and is thus fraught with
peril.

When we require a direct link between guilt and punishment we
believe that we adhere to a fundamental truth that has somehow eluded
the primitive mind. In fact, we are ignoring a problem that poses a very
real threat to all primitive societies: escalating revenge, unleashed
violence—a problem the seeming extravagances of their customs and the
violence of their religious practices are specifically designed to meet.

In Greek culture in particular, physical contact with the anathema is
avoided. Behind this peculiar prohibition lurks a fear perhaps analogous
to the one that inspires the Chukchi custom. To do violence to a violent
person is to be contaminated by his violence. It is best, therefore, to
arrange matters so that nobody, except perhaps the culprit himself, is
directly responsible for his death, so that nobody is obliged to raise a finger
against him. He may be abandoned without provisions in mid-ocean, or
stranded on top of a mountain, or forced to hurl himself from a cliff. The
custom of exposure, as a means of getting rid of malformed children,
seems to find its origin in this same fear.

All such customs may appear to us unreasonable and absurd. In fact
they adhere to a coherent logic. All of them concern themselves with
formulating and practicing a form of violence incapable of serving as a
connecting link between the violent act that preceded and the one that
must follow. The aim is to achieve a radically new type of violence, truly
decisive and self-contained, a form of violence that will put an end once
and for all to violence itself.

Primitive peoples try to break the symmetry of reprisal by addressing
themselves directly to the question of form. Unlike us, they perceive
recurrent patterns, and they attempt to halt this recurrence by intro-
ducing something different into the picture. Modern man has long since
lost his fear of reciprocal violence, which, after all, provides our judicial
system with its structure. Because the overwhelming authority of the
judiciary prevents its sentence from becoming the first step in an endless
series of reprisals, we can no longer appreciate primitive man’s deep-
seated fear of pure, unadulterated vengeance. The Chukchi’s behavior or
the Greeks’ cautious treatment of the anathema strike us as puzzling.

Of course, the Chukchi solution is not to be confused with retaliatory
vengeance, ritual sacrifice, or legal punishment. And yet it is reminiscent
of all these institutions. Their solution seems to occur at the point where
all three intersect. Unless the modern mind can cope with the fact that the
three are indeed capable of intersecting, it is not likely to shed much light
on the questions that concern us here.

The Chukchi solution is fraught with psychological implications, all of
rather limited interest. For example, it can be said that in choosing to kill
someone close to the culprit rather than the culprit himself the Chukchi


are trying to be conciliatory without risking a loss of face. That is indeed
possible, but there are many other possibilities as well. It is easy to lose
one’s way in a maze of psychological speculation. The religious structure
clearly transcends all “psychological” interpretations; it neither requires
nor contradicts them. The essential religious concern here is ritual impurity.
And the cause of ritual impurity is violence. In many cases, this fact seems self-evident.

Two men come to blows; blood is spilt; both men are thus rendered
impure. Their impurity is contagious, and anyone who remains in their
presence risks becoming a party to their quarrel. The only sure way to
avoid contagion is to flee the scene of violence. There is no question here
of duty or morality. Contamination is a terrible thing, and only those who
are already contaminated would wilfully expose themselves to it.

If even an accidental contact with a “contaminated” being can spread
the impurity, it goes without saying that a violent and hostile encounter
will guarantee infection. Therefore, the Chukchi reason, whenever
violence is inevitable, it is best that the victim be pure, untainted by any
involvement in the dispute. As we can see, these notions of impurity and
contagion play an active role in social relations and are firmly rooted in
reality. It is precisely this basis in reality that scholars have long denied.
Modern observers—particularly Frazer’s contemporaries and disciples—
were totally blind to the reality that lay behind these ideas, because it was
not their reality and because primitive religion succeeded in camouflaging
its social function. Concepts such as impurity and contagion, because they
translate human relations into material terms, provide a sort of camou-
flage. The peril that overshadows all human relations and that stems from
these relations is presented either in a purely material or in a wholly
otherworldly guise. The notion of ritual impurity can degenerate until it is
nothing more than a terror-stricken belief in the malevolent results of
physical contact. Violence has been transformed into a sort of seminal
fluid that impregnates objects on contact and whose diffusion, like elec-
tricity or Balzacian “magnetism,” is determined by physical laws. Far from
dissipating the ignorance that surrounds these concepts, modern thinking
only reinforces the confusion. By denying religion any basis in reality, by
viewing it as a sort of bedtime story for children, we collaborate with
violence in its game of deception.

In many religious communities—among the ancient Greeks, for
instance—when a man has hanged himself, his body becomes impure. So
too does the rope from which he dangles, the tree to which the rope is
attached, and the field where the tree stands. The taint of impurity
diminishes, however, as one draws away from the body. It is as if the
scene of a violent act, and the objects with which the violence has been
committed, send out emanations that penetrate everything in the
immediate area, growing gradually weaker through time and space.

When a town has undergone a terrible bloodletting, and emissaries
from that town are sent to another community, they are considered
impure. Every effort is made to avoid touching them, talking to them,
remaining in their presence any longer than necessary. After their
departure rites of purification are undertaken: sacrifices offered, lustral
water sprinkled about.

While Frazer and his disciples tend to view this fear of infection by the
“impure” as a prime example of the “irrational” and “superstitious” elem-
ent of religious thought, other observers regard it as an anticipation of
sound scientific principles. They point out the striking resemblance
between the precautions that modern medicine takes against bacterial
infection and the ritualistic avoidance of pollution.

In some societies contagious diseases—smallpox, for instance—have
their own particular gods. During his illness the patient is dedicated to the
god; that is, he is isolated from the community and put under the supervi-
sion ofan “initiate,” or priest of the god, someone who has contracted the
illness and survived it. This man now partakes of the god’s power; he is
immune to the effects of the divine violence.

It is easy to see why some observers have concluded that these impurity
rituals reveal some sort of vague intuitive knowledge of microbiology;
that the rituals, in short, are grounded in fact. Against this view it is
argued that the procedures that are supposed to protect the believers from
ritual impurity often disregard, or even flout, the principles of modern
hygiene. This argument is not wholly satisfactory, however, for it fails to
take into account the possible parallels between ritualistic precautions
and the first tentative measures taken in the early days of public
hygiene—in the nineteenth century, for example.

The theory that regards religious terrors or taboos as a sort of proto-
science has hit on something of real interest, but too indefinite and limited
to be of much use in our investigation. Such a theory can only arise in a
culture that regards sickness as the sole fatal influence, the sole enemy man
has to conquer. Clearly, medical considerations are not excluded from the
primitive concept of contagion, and the prevention of epidemics plays a
definite role in impurity rites. But these factors play only a minor role in
primitive culture. They arouse our interest precisely because they offer
the sole instance in which the modern scientific notion of contagion,
which is exclusively pathological, coincides with the primitive concept,
which is far broader in scope.

The aspects of religion in which contagion seems to have some reality
for us are hard to distinguish from those in which it ceases to have any
reality. That is not to say that primitive religion is afflicted with the sort of
“confusion” that Frazer or Lévy-Bruhl attributed to it. The assimilation of
contagious diseases and all forms of violence—the latter also regarded as
contagious in nature—is based on a number of complementary inferences
that combine to form a strikingly coherent picture.

A primitive society, a society that lacks a legal system, is exposed to
the sudden escalation of violence. Such a society is compelled to adopt
attitudes we may well find incomprehensible. Our incomprehension
seems to stem from two main factors. In the first place, we know abso-
lutely nothing about the contagion of violence, not even whether it actu-
ally exists. In the second place, the primitive people themselves recognize
this violence only in an almost entirely dehumanized form; that is, under
the deceptive guise of the sacred.

Considered all together, the ritual precautions against violence are
firmly rooted in reality, absurd though some of them may appear to our
own eyes. If the sacrificial catharsis actually succeeds in preventing the
unlimited propagation of violence, a sort of imfection is in fact being
checked.

From the outset of this study, after all, I have regarded violence as
something eminently communicable. The tendency of violence to hurl
itself on a surrogate if deprived of its original object can surely be
described as a contaminating process. Violence too long held in check will
overflow its bounds—and woe to those who happen to be nearby. Ritual
precautions are intended both to prevent this flooding and to offer protec-
tion, insofar as it is possible, to those who find themselves in the path of
ritual impurity—that is, caught in the floodtide of violence.

The slightest outbreak of violence can bring about a catastrophic
escalation. Though we may tend to lose sight of this fact in our own daily
lives, we are intellectually aware of its validity, and are often reminded
that there is something infectious about the spectacle of violence. Indeed,
at times it is impossible to stay immune from the infection. Where vio-
lence is concerned, intolerance can prove as fatal an attitude as tolerance,
for when it breaks out it can happen that those who oppose its progress do
more to assure its triumph than those who endorse it. There is no universal
tule for quelling violence, no principle of guaranteed effectiveness. At
times all the remedies, harsh as well as gentle, seem efficacious; at other
times, every measure seems to heighten the fever it is striving to abate.

Inevitably the moment comes when violence can only be countered by
more violence. Whether we fail or succeed in our effort to subdue it, the
real victor is always violence itself. The mimetic attributes of violence are
extraordinary—sometimes direct and positive, at other times indirect and
negative. The more men strive to curb their violent impulses, the more
these impulses seem to prosper. The very weapons used to combat vio-
lence are turned against their users. Violence is like a raging fire that feeds
on the very objects intended to smother its flames.

The metaphor of fire could well give way to metaphors of tempest,
flood, earthquake. Like the plague, the resemblance violence bears to
these natural cataclysms is not limited to the realm of poetic imagery. In
acknowledging that fact, however, we do not mean to endorse the theory
that sees in the sacred a simple transfiguration of natural phenomena.

The sacred consists of all those forces whose dominance over man
increases or seems to increase in proportion to man’s effort to master
them. Tempests, forest fires, and plagues, among other phenomena, may
be classified as sacred. Far outranking these, however, though in a far less
obvious manner, stands human violence—violence seen as something
exterior to man and henceforth as a part of all the other outside forces that
threaten mankind. Violence is the heart and secret soul of the sacred.

We have yet to learn how man succeeds in positing his own violence as
an independent being. Once he has accomplished this feat, however, the
sacred presence invades his universe, mysteriously infects, without parti-
cipating in it, and buffets him about rather in the manner of a plague or
other natural disaster. Once all this has occurred, man is confronted with a
group of phenomena that, despite their heterogeneous appearance,
exhibit remarkable similarities.

As a general practice, it is wise to avoid contact with the sick if one
wishes to stay healthy. Similarly, it is wise to steer clear of homicides if
one is eager not to be killed.

As we see it, these are two distinct types of “contagion.” Modern science
concerns itself exclusively with one type, and has established its reality
beyond all dispute. However, the other type could well be of greater
importance to the members of a society that we have defined as
primitive—that is, a society lacking legal sanctions.

Religious thought encompasses a large body of phenomena under the
heading of ritual impurity—phenomena that seem disparate and absurd
from the viewpoint of modern science but whose relationship and reality
become perfectly clear when tested for the presence of basic violence, the
prime ingredient and ultimate resource of the whole system.

There are undeniable similarities, for instance, between a bout of
serious illness and an act of violence wilfully perpetrated by an enemy.
The sufferings of the invalid are analogous to those of the wounded
victim; and if the invalid runs the risk of dying, so too do all those who are
involved in one fashion or another, either actively or passively, in a
violent action. Death is nothing more than the worst form of violence that
can befall a man. It is no less reasonable, therefore, to lump together
all the possible causes of death, pathological and otherwise, than it is to
create a separate category for only one of them: sickness.

To understand religious thought requires an empirical approach. The
goal of religious thinking is exactly the same as that of technological
research—namely, practical action. Whenever man is truly concerned
with obtaining concrete results, whenever he is hard pressed by reality, he
abandons abstract speculation and reverts to a mode of response that
becomes increasingly cautious and conservative as the forces he hopes to
subdue, or at least to outrun, draw ever nearer.

In its simplest, perhaps most elementary form, religion manifests little
curiosity about the origins of those terrible forces that visit their fury on
mankind but seems to concentrate its attention on determining a regular
sequential pattern that will enable man to anticipate these onslaughts and
take measures against them.

Religious empiricism invariably leads to one conclusion: it is essential to
keep as far away as possible from sacred things, always to avoid direct
contact with them. Naturally, such thinking occasionally coincides with
medical empiricism or with scientific empiricism in general. This is why
some observers insist on regarding religious empiricism as a preliminary
stage of science.

This same empiricism, however, can sometimes reach conclusions so
utterly foreign to our own way of thinking and can show itself so narrow,
inflexible and myopic in its attitudes that we are tempted to attribute its
functioning to some sort of psychological malaise. Such a reaction leads
us to regard primitive society as an “ailing” society, beside which our
“civilized” society presents a picture of radiant health.

The adherents of this theory show no hesitation in standing these
categories on their heads, however, whenever the need arises. Thus, on
occasion, it is “civilization” that is sick; and because civilized society is the
antithesis of primitive society, it now appears that the primitive sphere
must be the healthy one. Manipulate them as one will, it looks as if
the concepts of sickness and health are not very useful in clarifying the
relationship between primitive societies and our own.

Ritual precautions that appear lunatic or at least highly exaggerated in a
modern context are in fact quite reasonable when viewed in their proper
context—that is, in the context of religion’s complete unawareness of the
violence it makes sacred. When men believe that they can actually feel the
breath of a Homeric Cyclops at their backs, they are apt to resort to all
means at their disposal, to embrace all possible precautions. It seems safer
to overreact than to underreact.

This religious attitude is not dissimilar to that of medicine when
suddenly confronted with an unknown disease. An epidemic breaks out;
the doctors and scientists are unable to isolate the pathogenic agent.
Under the circumstances, what should they do? Clearly they must adopt,
not some of the precautionary measures employed against familiar
diseases, but all of them, without exception. Ideally, they would invent
entirely new measures, since the enemy they are fighting is itself
employing new weapons.

Once the microbe has been identified, it is seen that some of the
measures employed were completely useless and should be abandoned in
any future dealings with the disease. Yet it must be admitted that as long
as the cause of the illness was unknown, their use was fully justified.

We must be careful not to push our metaphor too far. Neither primitive
nor modern man has yet succeeded in identifying the microbe responsible
for the dread disease of violence. Western civilization is hindered in its
efforts to isolate and analyze the causes and to examine them in any
but the most superficial manner because it has enjoyed until this day a
mysterious immunity from the most virulent forms of violence—an
immunity not, it seems, of our society’s making, but one that has perhaps
resulted in the making of our society.

Among primitive taboos the one that has perhaps been most analyzed is
the taboo surrounding menstrual blood. Menstrual blood is regarded as
impure; menstruating women are segregated from the community. They
are forbidden to touch any objects of communal usage, sometimes even
their own food, for risk of contamination.

If we wish to understand why menstruation is considered “impure,”
we must consider it within the general category of bloodletting. Most
primitive peoples take the utmost care to avoid contact with blood. Spilt
blood of any origin, unless it has been associated with a sacrificial act, is
considered impure. This universal attribution of impurity to spilt blood
springs directly from the definition we have just proposed: wherever
violence threatens, ritual impurity is present. When men are enjoying
peace and security, blood is a rare sight. When violence is unloosed, how-
ever, blood appears everywhere—on the ground, underfoot, forming
great pools. Its very fluidity gives form to the contagious nature of
violence. Its presence proclaims murder and announces new upheavals to
come. Blood stains everything it touches the color of violence and death.
Its very appearance seems, as the saying goes, to “cry out for vengeance.”

Any bloodletting is frightening. It is only natural, therefore, that
menstrual bleeding should awaken fear. However, there is another,
complicating element at work here. Although menstrual bleeding can be
readily distinguished from blood spilt in a murder or an accident and can
thus be dissociated from those virulent forms of violence, it is in many
societies regarded as the most impure of impurities. We can only assume
that this extreme reaction has to do with the sexual aspect of menstruation.

Sexuality is one of those primary forces whose sovereignty over man is
assured by man’s firm belief in his sovereignty over it. The most extreme
forms of violence can never be directly sexual because they are collective
in nature. The group is quite capable of perpetrating a single, coherent act
of violence, whose force is increased with the addition of each individual
quotient of violence; but sexuality is never truly collective. That fact alone
explains why sexual interpretations of the sacred invariably ignore or play
down the role of violence, whereas an interpretation based on violence
readily grants sexuality the prominent place it occupies in all primitive
religions. We are tempted to conclude that violence is impure because of
its relation to sexuality. Yet only the reverse proposition can withstand
close scrutiny. Sexuality is impure because it has to do with violence.

Such an idea seems to run counter to the spirit of contemporary
humanism, which has settled into a friendly accord with the pan-
sexualism, of the psychoanalysts and remains unruffled even by the
death-wish theory. Nonetheless, the signs are too numerous and too clear
to be ignored. We have conceded that menstrual blood has a direct rela-
tionship to sexuality; we also contend that its relationship to unleashed
violence is even closer. The blood of a murdered man is impure. This
impurity cannot be derived from the impurity attributed to menstrual
blood. On the other hand, to understand the impurity of menstrual blood
we must trace its relationship to blood spilt by violence, as well as to
sexuality. The fact that the sexual organs of women periodically emit a
flow of blood has always made a great impression on men; it seems to
confirm an affinity between sexuality and those diverse forms of violence
that invariably lead to bloodshed.

To understand the nature and extent of this affinity we must return to
that solid core of “common sense” that plays a far greater role in religious
thinking than fashionable theorists are willing to acknowledge. In fact,
the notion that the beliefs of all mankind are a grand mystification that we
alone have succeeded in penetrating is a hardy perennial—as well as
being, to say the least, somewhat arrogant. The problem at hand is not the
arrogance of Western science nor its blatant “imperialism,” but rather its
sheer inadequacy. It is precisely when the need to understand becomes
most urgent that the explanations proposed in the domain of religion
become most unsatisfactory.

The connection between sexuality and religion is a heritage common to
all religions and is supported by an impressive array of convergent facts.
Sex and violence frequently come to grips in such direct forms as abduc-
tion, rape, defloration, and various sadistic practices, as well as in indirect
actions of indefinite consequences. Sex is at the origin of various illnesses,
real or imaginary; it culminates in the bloody labors of childbirth, which
may entail the death of mother, child, or both together. Even within the
ritualistic framework of marriage, when all the matrimonial vows and
other interdictions have been conscientiously observed, sexuality is
accompanied by violence; and as soon as one trespasses beyond the limits
of matrimony to engage in illicit relationships—incest, adultery, and the
like—the violence, and the impurity resulting from this violence, grows
more potent and extreme. Sexuality leads to quarrels, jealous rages,
mortal combats. It is a permanent source of disorder even within the most
harmonious of communities.

In refusing to admit an association between sexuality and violence—an
association readily acknowledged by men over the course of several
millennia—modern thinkers are attempting to prove their broadminded-
ness and liberality. Their stance has led to numerous misconceptions. Like
violence, sexual desire tends to fasten upon surrogate objects if the object
to which it was originally attracted remains inaccessible; it willingly
accepts substitutes. And again like violence, repressed sexual desire
accumulates energy that sooner or later bursts forth, causing tremendous
havoc. It is also worth noting that the shift from violence to sexuality and
from sexuality to violence is easily effected, even by the most “normal” of
individuals, totally lacking in perversion. Thwarted sexuality leads natur-
ally to violence, just as lovers’ quarrels often end in an amorous embrace.
Recent scientific findings seem to justify the primitive perspective on
many points. Sexual excitement and violent impulses manifest them-
selves in the same manner. In both instances, the majority of discernible
bodily reactions are identical.'*

Before we attempt to explain away the taboo on menstrual blood by
means of some all-inclusive, generalized interpretation—before, for
example, we invoke those “phantasms” that play the same role in our
consciousness as do the “enchanters’ tricks” in Don Quixote’s—we should
make quite sure that we have first exhausted all direct avenues to
comprehension. In fact, there is nothing incomprehensible about the
viewpoint that sees menstrual blood as a physical representation of sexual
violence. We ought, however, to go further: to inquire whether this
process of symbolization does not respond to some half-suppressed desire
to place the blame for all forms of violence on women. By means of this
taboo a transfer of violence has been effected and a monopoly established
that is clearly detrimental to the female sex.

The taint of impurity cannot always be avoided; even the most careful
precautions are no security against it. And the least contact with the
infection can contaminate the entire community.

How can one cleanse the infected members of all trace of pollution?
Does there exist some miraculous substance potent enough not only to
resist infection but also to purify, if need be, the contaminated blood?
Only blood itself, blood whose purity has been guaranteed by the
performance of appropriate rites—the blood, in short, of sacrificial
victims—can accomplish this feat.

Behind this astonishing paradox, the menace of violent action can be
discerned. All concepts of impurity stem ultimately from the community’s
fear of a perpetual cycle of violence arising in its midst. The menace is
always the same and provokes the same set of responses, the same sacri-
ficial gestures designed to redirect the violence onto inconsequential
victims. The idea of ritual purification is far more than mere shadow play
or illusion.

The function of ritual is to “purify” violence; that is, to “trick” violence
into spending itself on victims whose death will provoke no reprisals.
Because the secret of this mechanism is unknown to the participants in
the rites, religion tries to account for its own operation metaphorically,
using for that purpose the objects and materials involved in that oper-
ation. The properties of blood, for example, vividly illustrate the entire
operation of violence. We have already spoken of blood spilt by mischance
or malice. Blood that dries on the victim soon loses its viscous quality and
becomes first a dark sore, then a roughened scab. Blood that is allowed to
congeal on its victim is the impure product of violence, illness, or death. In
contrast to this contaminated substance is the fresh blood of newly
slaughtered victims, crimson and free flowing. This blood is never allowed
to congeal, but is removed without trace as soon as the rites have been
concluded.

The physical metamorphosis of spilt blood can stand for the double
nature of violence. Some religious practices make elaborate use of this
duality. Blood serves to illustrate the point that the same substance can
stain or cleanse, contaminate or purify, drive men to fury and murder or
appease their anger and restore them to life.

We are not dealing here with one of Gaston Bachelard’s “material
metaphors,” a poetic recreation of little real consequence. Nor does Laura
Makarius’s suggestion that the ambiguous character of blood is in fact the
ultimate reality behind the constant reversals of primitive religion seem
wholly apposite here.'® Both authors lose sight of a crucial point: the
paradoxical nature of violence. Although religion grasps this paradox—
and that only tentatively—mostly by means of such symbolic representa-
tions as that of blood, it differs radically from modem theory, which
speaks of “phantasms” and “poetry” and does not even realize how real
the sacrificial process can be and how appropriate the major metaphors
and symbols through which it is expressed.

Even the wildest aberrations of religious thought still manage to bear
witness to the fact that evil and the violent measures taken to combat evil
are essentially the same. At times violence appears to man in its most
terrifying aspect, wantonly sowing chaos and destruction; at other times it
appears in the guise of peacemaker, graciously distributing the fruits of
sacrifice.

The secret of the dual nature of violence still eludes men. Beneficial
violence must be carefully distinguished from harmful violence, and the
former continually promoted at the expense of the latter. Ritual is nothing
more than the regular exercise of “good” violence. As we have remarked,
if sacrificial violence is to be effective it must resemble the nonsacrificial
variety as closely as possible. That is why some rites may seem to us
nothing more than senseless inversions of prohibited acts. For instance, in
some societies menstrual blood is regarded as a beneficial substance when
employed in certain rites but retains its baleful character in other contexts.

The two-in-one nature of blood—that is, of violence—is strikingly illus-
trated in Euripides’ Jon. The Athenian queen, Creusa, plots to do away
with the hero by means of an exotic talisman: two drops of blood from
the deadly Gorgon. One drop is a deadly poison, the other a miraculous
healing agent. The queen’s old slave asks her the origin of this substance:

Creusa: When the fatal blow was struck a drop spurted from the hollow
vein. ...

Slave: How is it used? What are its properties?

Creusa: It wards off all sickness and nourishes life.

Slave: And the other drop?

Creusa: It kills. It is made from the Gorgon’s venomous serpents.

Slave: Do you carry them mixed together or separate?

Creusa: Are good and evil to be mixed together? Separate, of course.

Nothing could seem more alike than two drops of blood, yet in this case
nothing could be more different. It is only too easy to blend them together
and produce a substance that would efface all distinction between the
pure and the impure. Then the difference between “good” and “bad” vio-
lence would be eliminated as well. As long as purity and impurity remain
distinct, even the worst pollution can be washed away; but once they are
allowed to mingle, purification is no longer possible.

Notes

1 Henri Hubert and Marcel Mauss, Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function (Chicago,
1968).

2 Anthony Storr, Human Aggression (New York, 1968).

3 Konrad Lorenz, On Aggression, trans. Marjorie Kerr Wilson (New York, 1966).

4 Joseph de Maistre, “Eclaircissement sur les sacrifices,” Les Soirées de
Saint-Pétersbourg (Lyons, 1890), 2:341-42. Here, and throughout the book,
translations are by Patrick Gregory unless an English-language reference is
cited.

5 E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer (Oxford, 1940); Godfrey Lienhardt, Divinity
and Experience: The Religion of the Dinka (Oxford, 1961).

6 A.R. Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function in Primitive Society (Glencoe, IIL.,
1952), p. 158.

7 Here, and throughout the book, quotations from the Greek plays have been
translated by Patrick Gregory, from the original Greek.
8 Cf. Chapter 4, pp. 109-14.

9 Hubert and Mauss, Sacrifice, p. 33.

10 Bronislaw Malinowski, Crime and Custom in Savage Society (Totowa, N.J.,
1967), p. 94.

11 A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, The Andaman Islanders (New York, 1964), p. 52.

12 Robert Lowie, Primitive Society (New York, 1970), p. 400.

13 Malinowski, Crime and Custom in Savage Society, pp. 94, 98.

14 Lowie, Primitive Society, p. 400.

15 Storr, Human Aggression, pp. 18-19.

16 Cf. Laura Makarius, “Les Tabous du forgeron,” Diogéne 62 (April-June 1968).


The Sacrificial Crisis


As we have seen, the proper functioning of the sacrificial process requires
not only the complete separation of the sacrificed victim from those
beings for whom the victim is a substitute but also a similarity between
both parties. This dual requirement can be fulfilled only through a
delicately balanced mechanism of associations.

Any change, however slight, in the hierarchical classification of living
creatures risks undermining the whole sacrificial structure. The sheer
repetition of the sacrificial act—the repeated slaughter of the same type of
victim—inevitably brings about such change. But the inability to adapt to
new conditions is a trait characteristic of religion in general. If, as is often
the case, we encounter the institution of sacrifice either in an advanced
state of decay or reduced to relative insignificance, it is because it has
already undergone a good deal of wear and tear.

Whether the slippage in the mechanism is due to “too little” or “too
much” contact between the victim and those whom the victim represents,
the results are the same. The elimination of violence is no longer effected;
on the contrary, conflicts within the community multiply, and the menace
of chain reactions looms ever larger.

If the gap between the victim and the community is allowed to grow too
wide, all similarity will be destroyed. The victim will no longer be capable
of attracting the violent impulses to itself; the sacrifice will cease to serve
as a “good conductor,” in the sense that metal is a good conductor of
electricity. On the other hand, if there is foo much continuity the violence
will overflow its channels. “Impure” violence will mingle with the “sacred”
violence of the rites, turning the latter into a scandalous accomplice in the
process of pollution, even a kind of catalyst in the propagation of further
impurity.

These are postulates that seem to take form a priori from our earlier
conclusions. They can also be discerned in literature—in the adaptations
of certain myths in classical Greek tragedy, in particular in Euripides’
version of the legend of Heracles.

Euripides’ Heracles contains no tragic conflict, no debate between
declared adversaries. The real subject of the play is the failure of a sacri-
fice, the act of sacrificial violence that suddenly goes wreng. Heracles,
returning home after the completion of his labors, finds his wife and
children in the power of a usurper named Lycus, who is preparing to offer
them as sacrificial victims. Heracles kills Lycus. After this most recent act
of violence, committed in the heart of the city, the hero’s need to purify
himself is greater than ever, and he sets about preparing a sacrifice of his
own. His wife and children are with him when Heracles, suddenly seized
by madness, mistakes them for his enemies and sacrifices them.

Heracles’ misidentification of his family is attributed to Lyssa, goddess of
madness, who is operating as an emissary of two other goddesses, Iris and
Hera, who bear Heracles ill will. The preparations for the sacrifice provide
an imposing setting for the homicidal outburst; it is unlikely that their
dramatic significance passed unnoticed by the author. In fact, it is Euripides
himself who directs our attention to the ritualistic origins of the
onslaught. After the massacre, Heracles’ father, Amphitryon, asks his son:
“My child, what happened to you? How could this horror have taken
place? Was it perhaps the spilt blood that turned your head?” Heracles,
who is just returning to consciousness and remembers nothing, inquires
in turn: “Where did the madness overtake me? Where did it strike me
down?” Amphitryon replies: “Near the altar, where you were purifying
your hands over the sacred flames.”

The sacrifice contemplated by the hero succeeded only too well in
polarizing the forces of violence. Indeed, it produced a superabundance of
violence of a particularly virulent kind. As Amphitryon suggested, the
blood shed in the course of the terrible labors and in the city itself finally
turned the hero’s head. Instead of drawing off the violence and allowing it
to ebb away, the rites brought a veritable flood of violence down on the
victim. The sacrificial rites were no longer able to accomplish their task;
they swelled the surging tide of impure violence instead of channeling it.
The mechanism of substitutions had gone astray, and those whom the
sacrifice was designed to protect became its victims.

The difference between sacrificial and nonsacrificial violence is
anything but exact; it is even arbitrary. At times the difference threatens
to disappear entirely. There is no such thing as truly “pure” violence.
Nevertheless, sacrificial violence can, in the proper circumstances, serve
as an agent of purification. That is why those who perform the rites are
obliged to purify themselves at the conclusion of the sacrifice. The
procedure followed is reminiscent of atomic power plants; when the
expert has finished decontaminating the installation, he must himself be
decontaminated. And accidents can always happen.

The catastrophic inversion of the sacrificial act would appear to be an
essential element in the Heracles myth. The motif reappears, thinly
concealed behind secondary themes, in another episode of his story, in
Sophocles’ The Women of Trachis.

Heracles had mortally wounded the centaur Nessus, who had assaulted
Heracles’ wife, Deianira. Before dying, the centaur gave the young
woman a shirt smeared with his sperm—or, in Sophocles’ version,
smeared with his blood mixed with the blood of a Hydra. (Once again, as
in the Jon, we encounter the theme of the two kinds of blood mingling to
form one.)

The subject of the tragedy, as in Euripides’ Heracles, is the return of the
hero. In this instance Heracles is bringing with him a pretty young captive,
of whom Deianira is jealous. Deianira sends a servant to her husband with
a welcoming gift, the shirt of Nessus. With his dying breath the centaur
had told her that the shirt would assure the wearer’s eternal fidelity to
her; but he cautioned her to keep it well out of the way of any flame or
source of heat.

Heracles puts on the shirt, and soon afterward lights a fire for the rites of
sacrificial purification. The flames activate the poison in the shirt; it is the
rite itself that unlooses the evil. Heracles, contorted with pain, presently
ends his life on the pyre he has begged his son to prepare. Before dying,
Heracles kills the servant who delivered the shirt to him; this death, along
with his own and the subsequent suicide of his wife, contributes to the
cycle of violence heralded by Heracles’ return and the failure of the sacri-
fice. Once again, violence has struck the beings who sought the protection
of sacrificial rites.

A number of sacrifice motifs intermingle in these two plays. A special
sort of impurity clings to the warrior returning to his homeland, still
tainted with the slaughter of war. In the case of Heracles, his sanguinary
labors render him particularly impure.
The returning warrior risks carrying the seed of violence into the very
heart of his city. The myth of Horatius, as explicated by Georges Dumézil,
illustrates this theme: Horatius kills his sister before any ritual purification
has been performed. In the case of Heracles the impurity triumphs over
the rite itself.

If we examine the mechanism of violence in these two tragedies, we
notice that when the sacrifice goes wrong it sets off a chain reaction of
the sort defined in the first chapter. The murder of Lycus is presented
in the Euripides play asa last “labor” of the hero, a still-rational prelude to
the insane outburst that follows. Seen from the perspective of the ritualist,
it might well constitute a first link of impure violence. With this incident,
as we have noted, violence invades the heart of the city. This initial murder
corresponds to the death of the old servant in The Women of Trachis.

Supernatural intervention plays no part in these episodes, except
perhaps to cast a thin veil over the true subject: the sacrificial celebration
that has gone wrong. The goddess Lyssa, Nessus’ shirt—these add nothing
to the meaning of the two stories; rather, they act as a veil, and as soon as
the veil is drawn aside we encounter the same theme of “good” violence
turning into “bad.” The mythological accompaniments of the stories can
be seen as redundant. Lyssa, the goddess of madness, sounds more like a
refugee from an allegorical tale than a real goddess, and Nessus’ shirt
joins company with all the acts of violence that Heracles carries on his
back.

The theme of the Warrior’s Return is not, strictly speaking, mythological,
and readily lends itself to sociological or psychological interpretations. The
conquering hero who threatens to destroy the liberty of his homeland
belongs to history, not myth. Certainly that is the way Corneille seems to
approach the subject in Horace, although in his version of the tale the
ideology is somewhat reversed—the returning warrior is rightly shocked
by his sister's lack of patriotism. We could easily translate the “case histor-
ies” of Heracles and Horatius into psychological or psychoanalytical terms
and come up with numerous working theories, each at variance with the
other. But we should avoid this temptation, for in debating the relative
merits of each theory we would lose sight of the role played by ritual—a
subject that has nothing to do with such debates, even though it may, as
we shall see, open the way to them. Being more primitive, ritualistic action
is hospitable to all ideological interpretations and dependent on none. It
has only one axiom: the contagious nature of the violence encountered by
the warrior in battle—and only one prescription: the proper performance
of ritual purification. Its sole purpose is to prevent the resurgence of
violence and its spread throughout the community.

The two tragedies we have been discussing present in anecdotal form,
as if dealing exclusively with exceptional individuals, events that are
significant because they affect the community as a whole. Sacrifice is a
social act, and when it goes amiss the consequences are not limited to
some “exceptional” individual singled out by Destiny.

Historians seem to agree that Greek tragedy belonged to a period of
transition between the dominance of an archaic theocracy and the
emergence of a new, “modern” order based on statism and laws. Before its
decline the archaic order must have enjoyed a certain stability; and
this stability must have reposed on its religious element—that is, on the
sacrificial rites.

Although they predate the tragedians, the pre-Socratics are often
regarded as the philosophers of classical tragedy. In their writings we can
find echoes of the religious crisis we are attempting to define. The fifth
fragment of Heraclitus quite clearly deals with the decay of sacrificial rites,
with their inability to purify what is impure. Religious beliefs are
compromised by the decadent state of the ritual: “In vain do they strive for
purification by besmirching themselves with blood, as the man who has
bathed in the mire seeks to cleanse himself with mud. Such antics can
only strike the beholder as utter folly! In addressing their prayers
to images of the gods, they might just as well be speaking to the walls,
without seeking to know the true nature of gods or heroes.”

The difference between blood spilt for ritual and for criminal purposes
no longer holds. The Heraclitus fragment appears in even sharper relief
when compared to analogous passages in the Old Testament. The preexil-
ian prophets Amos, Isaiah, and Micah denounce in vehement terms the
impotence of the sacrificial process and ritual in general. In the most
explicit manner they link the decay of religious practices to the deterior-
ation of contemporary behavior. Inevitably, the eroding of the sacrificial
system seems to result in the emergence of reciprocal violence. Neighbors
who had previously discharged their mutual aggressions on a third party,
joining together in the sacrifice of an “outside” victim, now turn to sacri-
ficing one another. Empedocles’ Purifications brings us even closer to the
problem:

When will the sinister noise of this carnage cease? Can you not see that
you are devouring one another with your callous hearts?

The father seizes hold of the son, who has changed form; in his mad
delusion he kills him, murmuring prayers. The son cries out, imploring his
insane executioner to spare him. But the father hears him not, and cuts his
throat, and spreads a great feast in his palace. In the same way the son takes
hold of the father, the children their mother, one slaughtering the other and
devouring their own flesh and blood.

The concept of a “sacrificial crisis” may be useful in clarifying certain
aspects of Greek tragedy. To a real extent it is sacrificial religion that pro-
vides the language for these dramas; the criminal in the plays sees himself
not so much as a righter-of-wrongs as a performer-of-sacrifices. We
always view the “tragic flaw” from the perspective of the new, emergent
order; never from that of the old order in the final stages of decay. The
reason for this approach is clear: modern thought has never been able to
attribute any real function to the practice of sacrifice, and because the
nature of the practice eludes us, we naturally find it difficult to determine
when and if this practice is in the process of disintegration. In the case of
Greek tragedy it is not enough merely to believe in the existence of
the old order; we must look deeper if we hope to discover the religious
problems of the era. Unlike the Jewish prophets, whose viewpoint was
historical, the Greek tragedians evoked their own sacrificial crisis in terms
of legendary figures whose forms were fixed by tradition.

All the bloody events that serve as background to the plays—the
plagues and pestilences, civil and foreign wars—undoubtedly reflect the
contemporary scene, but the images are unclear, as if viewed through a
glass darkly. Each time, for example, a play of Euripides deals with the
collapse of a royal house (as in Heracles, Iphigenia in Aulis, or The Bacchae),
we are convinced that the poet is suggesting that the scene before our eyes
is only the tip of the iceberg, that the real issue is the fate of the entire
community. At the moment when Heracles is slaughtering his family off-
stage, the chorus cries out: “Look, look! The tempest is shaking the house;
the roof is falling in.”

If the tragic crisis is indeed to be described in terms of the sacrificial
crisis, its relationship to sacrifice should be apparent in all aspects of tra-
gedy—either conveyed directly through explicit reference or perceived
indirectly, in broad outline, underlying the texture of the drama.

If the art of tragedy is to be defined in a single phrase, we might do
worse than call attention to one of its most characteristic traits: the oppo-
sition of symmetrical elements. There is no aspect of the plot, form, or
language of a tragedy in which this symmetrical pattern does not recur.
The third actor, for instance, hardly constitutes the innovation that critics
have claimed. Third actor or no third actor, the core of the drama remains
the tragic dialogue; that is, the fateful confrontation during which the two
protagonists exchange insults and accusations with increasing earnestness
and rapidity. The Greek public brought to these verbal contests the same
educated sense of appreciation that French audiences many centuries
later evinced for their own classic drama—for Théraméne’s famous
speech from the last act of Phédre, for example, or for almost any passage
from Le Cid.

The symmetry of the tragic dialogue is perfectly mirrored by the
stichomythia, in which the two protagonists address one another in alter-
nating lines. In tragic dialogue hot words are substituted for cold steel. But
whether the violence is physical or verbal, the suspense remains the same.
The adversaries match blow for blow, and they seem so evenly matched
that it is impossible to predict the outcome of the battle. The structural
similarity between the two forms of violence is illustrated by the descrip-
tion of the duel between the brothers Eteocles and Polyneices in Euripides’
Phoenician Women. There is nothing in this account that does not apply
equally to both brothers: their parries, thrusts, and feints, their gestures
and postures, are identical: “If either saw the other’s eye peer over the rim
of his shield, He raised his spear.”

Polyneices loses his spear in the fight, and so does Eteocles. Both are
wounded. Each blow upsets the equilibrium, threatening to decide the
outcome then and there. It is immediately followed by a new blow that
not only redresses the balance but creates a symmetrical disequilibrium
that is itself, naturally enough, of short duration. The tragic suspense
follows the rhythm of these rapid exchanges, each one of which promises
to bring matters to a head—but never quite does so. “They struggle now
on even terms, each having spent his spear. Swords are unsheathed, and
the two brothers are locked in close combat. Shield clashes with shield,
and a great clamor engulfs them both.” Even death fails to tip the balance.
“They hit the dust and lay together side by side; and their heritage was still
unclaimed.”

The death of the brothers resolves nothing; it simply perpetuates the
symmetry of the battle. Each had been his army’s champion, and the two
armies now resume the struggle, reestablish the symmetry. Oddly
enough, however, the conflict is now transferred to a purely verbal plane,
transforming itself into a true tragic dialogue. Tragedy now assumes its
proper function as a verbal extension of physical combat, an interminable
debate set off by the chronically indecisive character of an act of violence
committed previously:

The soldiers then leapt to their feet, and the argument began. We claimed that
our king had won; they claimed the victory for Polyneices. The captains quar-
reled, too. Some said that Polyneices had struck the first blow; others replied
that death had snatched the palm of victory from both claimants.

The indecisiveness of the first combat spreads quite naturally to the second,
which then sows it abroad. The tragic dialogue is a debate without reso-
lution. Each side resolutely continues to deploy the same arguments,
emphases, goals; Gleichgewicht is Hélderlin’s word for it. Tragedy is the
balancing of the scale, not of justice but of violence. No sooner is some-
thing added to one side of the scale than its equivalent is contributed to
the other. The same insults and accusations fly from one combatant to the
other, as a ball flies from one player to another in tennis. The conflict
stretches on interminably because between the two adversaries there is no
difference whatsoever.

The equilibrium in the struggle has often been attributed to a so-called
tragic impartiality; Hélderlin’s word is Impartialitdt. 1 do not find this
interpretation quite satisfactory. Impartiality implies a deliberate refusal
to take sides, a firm commitment to treat both contestants equally. The
impartial party is not eager to resolve the issue, does not want to know if
there is a resolution; nor does he maintain that resolution is impossible.
His impartiality-at-any-price is not unfrequently simply an unsubstanti-
ated assertion of superiority. One of the adversaries is right, the other
wrong, and the onlooker is obliged to take sides; either that, or the rights
and wrongs are so evenly distributed between the two factions that taking
sides is impossible. The self-proclaimed advocate of impartiality does not
want to commit himself to either course of action. If pushed toward one
camp, he seeks refuge in the other. Men always find it distasteful to admit
that the “reasons” on both sides of a dispute are equally valid—which is to
say that violence operates without reason.

Tragedy begins at that point where the illusion of impartiality, as well
as the illusions of the adversaries, collapses. For example, in Oedipus the
King, Oedipus, Creon, and Tiresias are each in turn drawn into a conflict
that each had thought to resolve in the role of impartial mediator.

It is not clear to what extent the tragedians themselves managed to
remain impartial. For example, Euripides in The Phoenician Women barely
conceals his preference for Eteocles—or perhaps we should say his prefer-
ence for the Athenian public’s approval. In any case, his partiality is
superficial. The preferences registered for one side or another never
prevent the authors from constantly underlining the symmetrical
relationship between the adversaries.

At the very moment when they appear to be abandoning impartiality,
the tragedians do their utmost to deprive the audience of any means of
taking sides. Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides all utilize the same pro-
cedures and almost identical phraseology to convey symmetry, identity,
reciprocity. We encounter here an aspect of tragic art that has been largely
overlooked by contemporary criticism. Nowadays critics tend to assess a
work of art on the basis of its originality. To the extent that an author
cannot claim exclusive rights to his themes, his style, and his esthetic
effects, his work is deemed deficient. In the domain of esthetics, singularity
reigns supreme.

Such criteria cannot apply, of course, to Greek tragedy, whose authors
were not committed to the doctrine of originality at any price. Neverthe-
less, our frustrated individualism still exerts a deleterious effect on
modern interpretations of Greek tragedy.

It is readily apparent that Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides shared
certain literary traits and that the characters in their plays have certain
characteristics in common. Yet there is no reason to label these resem-
blances mere stereotypes. It is my belief that these “stereotypes” contain
the very essence of Greek tragedy. And if the tragic element in these plays
still eludes us, it is because we have obstinately averted our attention from
these similarities.

The tragedians portray men and women caught up in a form of violence
too impersonal in its workings, too brutal in its results, to allow any sort of
value judgement, any sort of distinction, subtle or simplistic, to be drawn
between “good” and “wicked” characters. That is why most modern inter-
pretations go astray; we have still not extricated ourselves entirely from
the “Manichean” frame of reference that gained sway in the Romantic era
and still exerts its influence today.

In Greek tragedy violence invariably effaces the differences between
antagonists. The sheer impossibility of asserting their differences fuels the
rage of Eteocles and Polyneices. In Euripides’ Heracles the hero kills Lycus
to keep him from sacrificing his family, and next he does what he wanted
to prevent his enemy from doing, thereby falling victim to the ironic
humor of a Destiny that seems to work hand in glove with violence. In the
end it is Heracles who carries out the crime meditated by his counterpart.
The more a tragic conflict is prolonged, the more likely it is to culminate
in a violent mimesis; the resemblance between the combatants grows
ever stronger until each presents a mirror image of the other. There is a
scientific corollary: modern research suggests that individuals of quite
different make-up and background respond to violence in essentially
the same way.

It is the act of reprisal, the repetition of imitative acts of violence, that
characterizes tragic plotting. The destruction of differences is particularly
spectacular when the hierarchichal distance between the characters, the
amount of respect due from one to the other, is great—between father
and son, for instance. This scandalous effacement of distinctions is appar-
ent in Euripides’ Alcestis. Father and son are engaged in a tragic dialogue;
each accuses the other of fleeing from death and leaving the heroine to
die. The symmetry is perfect, emphasized by the symmetrical interven-
tions of the members of the Chorus, who first castigate the son (“Young
man, remember to whom you are speaking; do not insult your father”),
and then rebuke the father (“Enough has been said on this subject; cease,
we pray you, to abuse your own son.”).

In Oedipus the King Sophocles frequently puts in Oedipus’s mouth words
that emphasize his resemblance to his father: resemblance in desires,
suspicions, and course of action. If the hero throws himself impetuously
into the investigation that causes his downfall, it is because he is reacting
just as Laius did in seeking out the potential assassin who, according to the
oracles, would replace him on the throne of Thebes and in the bed of the
queen.

Oedipus finally kills Laius, but it is Laius who, at the crossroads, first
raised his hand against his son. The patricide thus takes part in a reciprocal
exchange of murderous gestures. It is an act of reprisal in a universe based
on reprisals.

At the core of the Oedipus myth, as Sophocles presents it, is the
proposition that all masculine relationships are based on reciprocal acts of
violence. Laius, taking his cue from the oracle, violently rejects Oedipus
out of fear that his son will seize his throne and invade his conjugal bed.
Oedipus, taking his cue from the oracle, does away with Laius, violently
rebuffs the sphinx, then takes their places—as king and “scourge of the
city,” respectively. Again, Oedipus, taking his cue from the oracle, plots
the death of that unknown figure who may be seeking to usurp his own
position. Oedipus, Creon, and Tiresias, each taking his cue from the oracle,
seek one another’s downfall.

All these acts of violence gradually wear away the differences that exist
not only in the same family but throughout the community. The tragic
combat between Oedipus and Tiresias pits the community’s chief spiritual
leaders against one another. The enraged Oedipus seeks to strip the aura
of “mystery” from his rival, to prove that he is a false prophet, nothing
more:

Come tell us: have you truly shown yourself a prophet? When the terrible
sphinx held sway over our countrymen, did you ever whisper the words that
would have delivered them? That riddle was not to be answered by anyone;
the gift of prophecy was called for. Yet that gift was clearly not yours to give;
not was it ever granted to you, either by the birds or by the gods.

Confronted by the king’s frustration and rage at being unable to
uncover the truth, Tiresias launches his own challenge. The terms are
much the same: “If you are so clever at solving enigmas, why are you
powerless to solve this one?” Both parties in this tragic dialogue have
recourse to the same tactics, use the same weapons, and strive for the
same goal: destruction of the adversary. Tiresias poses as the champion of
tradition, taking up the cudgels on behalf of the oracles flouted by
Oedipus. However, in so doing he shows himself insolent to royal authority.
Although the targets are individuals, it is the institutions that receive
the blows. Legitimate authority trembles on its pedestal, and the combat-
ants finally assist in the downfall of the very order they strove to maintain.
The impiety referred to by the chorus—the neglect of the oracles, the
general decadence that pervades the religion of the community—are
surely part of the same phenomenon that works away at the undermining
of family relationships, as well as of religious and social hierarchies.

The sacrificial crisis, that is, the disappearance of the sacrificial rites,
coincides with the disappearance of the difference between impure
violence and purifying violence. When this difference has been effaced,
purification is no longer possible and impure, contagious, reciprocal
violence spreads throughout the community.

The sacrificial distinction, the distinction between the pure and the
impure, cannot be obliterated without obliterating all other differences as
well. One and the same process of violent reciprocity engulfs the whole.
The sacrificial crisis can be defined, therefore, as a crisis of distinctions—
that is, a crisis affecting the cultural order. This cultural order is nothing
more than a regulated system of distinctions in which the differences
among individuals are used to establish their “identity” and their mutual
relationships.

In the first chapter the danger threatening the community with the
decay of sacrificial practices was portrayed in terms of physical violence,
of cyclical vengeance set off by a chain reaction. We now discover more
insidious forms of the same evil. When the religious framework of a
society starts to totter, it is not exclusively or immediately the physical
security of the society that is threatened; rather, the whole cultural
foundation of the society is put in jeopardy. The institutions lose their
vitality; the protective facade of the society gives way; social values are
rapidly eroded, and the whole cultural structure seems on the verge of
collapse.

The hidden violence of the sacrificial crisis eventually succeeds in
destroying distinctions, and this destruction in turn fuels the renewed
violence. In short, it seems that anything that adversely affects the institution
of sacrifice will ultimately pose a threat to the very basis of the
community, to the principles on which its social harmony and equilibrium depend.

A single principle is at work in primitive religion and classical tragedy
alike, a principle implicit but fundamental. Order, peace, and fecundity
depend on cultural distinctions; it is not these distinctions but the loss of
them that gives birth to fierce rivalries and sets members of the same
family or social group at one another’s throats.

Modem society aspires to equality among men and tends instinctively
to regard all differences, even those unrelated to the economic or social
status of men, as obstacles in the path of human happiness. This modern
ideal exerts an obvious influence on ethnological approaches, although
more often on the level of technical procedure than that of explicit
principle. The permutations of this ideal are complex, rich in potential
contradictions, and difficult to characterize briefly. Suffice it to say that an
“antidifferential” prejudice often falsifies the ethnological outlook not
only on the origins of discord and conflict but also on all religious modes.
Although usually implicit, its principles are explicitly set forth in Victor
Turner’s The Ritual Process: “Structural differentiation, both vertical and
horizontal, is the foundation of strife and factionalism, and of struggles in
dyadic relations between incumbents of positions or rivals for positions.”!

When differences come unhinged they are generally identified as the
cause of those rivalries for which they also furnish the stakes. This has
not always been their role. As in the case of sacrificial rites, when they
no longer serve as a dam against violence, they serve to swell the flood.

In order to rid ourselves of some fashionable intellectual attitudes—
useful enough in their place, but not always relevant in dealing with the
past—we might turn to Shakespeare, who in the course of the famous
speech of Ulysses in Troilus and Cressida makes some interesting observa-
tions on the interaction of violence and “differences.” The point of view of
primitive religion and Greek tragedy could not be better summarized than
by this speech.

The Greek army has been besieging Troy for a long time and is growing
demoralized through want of action. In commenting on their position,
Ulysses strays from the particular to a general reflection on the role of
“Degree,” or distinctions, in human endeavors. “Degree,” or gradus, is the
underlying principle of all order, natural and cultural. It permits indi-
viduals to find a place for themselves in society; it lends a meaning to
things, arranging them in proper sequence within a hierarchy; it defines
the objects and moral standards that men alter, manipulate, and trans-
form. The musical metaphor describes that order as a “structure,” in the
modern sense of the word, a system of chords thrown into disharmony by
the sudden intervention of reciprocal violence:

... O when Degree is shaked
Which is the ladder to all high designs,
The enterprise is sick! How could communities,
Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores,
The primogenitive and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree, stand in authentic place?
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And, hark, what discord follows! Each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead:
Force should be right; or rather, right and wrong
Between whose endless jar justice resides,
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.


As in Greek tragedy and primitive religion, it is not the differences but
the loss of them that gives rise to violence and chaos, that inspires Ulysses’
plaint. This loss forces men into a perpetual confrontation, one that strips
them of all their distinctive characteristics—in short, of their “identities.”
Language itself is put in jeopardy. “Each thing meets/In mere oppug-
nancy,” the adversaries are reduced to indefinite objects, “things” that
wantonly collide with each other like loose cargo on the decks of a storm-
tossed ship. The metaphor of the floodtide that transforms the earth’s
surface to a muddy mass is frequently employed by Shakespeare to
designate the undifferentiated state of the world that is also portrayed in
Genesis and that we have attributed to the sacrificial crisis.

In this situation no one and nothing is spared; coherent thinking
collapses and rational activities are abandoned. All associative forms are
dissolved or become antagonistic; all values, spiritual or material, perish.
Of course, formal education, as represented by academic “degrees,” is
rendered useless, because its value derives from the now inoperative prin-
ciple of universal differentiation. To say that this speech merely reflects a
Renaissance commonplace, the great chain of being, is unsatisfactory.
Who has ever seen a great chain of being collapse?

Ulysses is a career soldier, authoritarian in temper and conservative in
inclination. Nevertheless, the order he is committed to defend is secretly
acknowledged as arbitrary. The end of distinctions means the triumph of
the strong over the weak, the pitting of father against son—the end of all
human justice, which is here unexpectedly defined in terms of “differ-
ences” among individuals. If perfect equilibrium invariably leads to
violence, as in Greek tragedy, it follows that the relative nonviolence
guaranteed by human justice must be defined as a sort of imbalance, a
difference between “good” and “evil” parallel to the sacrificial difference
between “pure” and “impure.” The idea of justice as a balanced scale, an
exercise in exquisite impartiality, is utterly foreign to this theory, which
sees the roots of justice in differences among men and the demise of
justice in the elimination of these differences. Whenever the terrible equi-
librium of tragedy prevails, all talk of right and wrong is futile. At that
point in the conflict one can only say to the combatants: Make friends or
pursue your own ruin.

If the two-in-one crisis that we have described is indeed a fundamental
reality—if the collapse of the cultural structure of a society leads to
reciprocal violence and if this collapse encourages the spread of violence
everywhere—then we ought to see signs of this reality outside the
restricted realms of Greek tragedy or Shakespearean drama. The closer
our contact with primitive societies, the more rapidly these societies tend
to lose their distinctive qualities; but this loss is in some cases effected
through a sacrificial crisis. And in some cases these crises have been
directly observed by ethnologists. Scholarly literature on the subject is
rather extensive; rarely, however, does a coherent picture emerge. More
often than not the accounts are fragmentary, mingled with commentary
relating to purely structural matters. A remarkable exception, well
worth our attention here, is Jules Henry’s Jungle People, which deals
with the Kaingang Indians of Santa Katarina in Brazil.* The author came
to live with the Indians shortly after they had been transferred to a
reservation, when the consequences of that last and radical change had
not yet completely taken hold. He was thus able to observe at first hand,
or through the testimony of witnesses, the process I call the sacrificial
crisis.

The extreme poverty of the Kaingang culture on a religious as well as a
technological level made a strong impression on Henry, who attributed it
to the blood feuds (that is, the cyclical vengeance) carried on among close
relatives. To describe the effects of this reciprocal violence he instinctively
turned to the hyperbolic imagery of the great myths, in particular to the
image of plague: “Feuds spread, cleaving the society asunder like a deadly
axe, blighting its life like the plague.”*

These are the very symptoms that we have made bold to identify with
the sacrificial crisis, or crisis of distinctions. The Kaingang seem to have
abandoned all their old mythology in favor of stories of actual acts of
revenge. When discussing internecine murders, “they seem to be fitting
together the parts of a machine, the intricate workings of which they
know precisely. Their absorbed interest in the history of their own
destruction has impressed on their minds with flawless clarity the
multitudinous cross-workings of feuds.”*

Although the Kaingang blood feuds represent the decadence of a
system that once enjoyed relative stability, the feuds still retain some
remnant of their original “sacrificial” nature. They constitute, in fact, a
more forceful, more violent—and therefore less effective—effort to keep a
grip on the “good” violence, with all its protective and constraining
powers. Indeed, the “bad” violence does not yet penetrate the defenses of
those Indians who are said to “travel together”; that is, go out together on
hunting expeditions. However, this group is always small in number, and
the relative peace that reigns within it is in sharp contrast to the violence
that rages triumphantly outside—between the different groups.

Within the group there is a spirit of conciliation. The most inflammatory
challenges pass unacknowledged; adultery, which provokes an instant
and bloody reprisal among members of rival groups, is openly tolerated.
As long as violence does not cross a certain threshold of intensity, it
remains sacrificial and defines an inner circle of nonviolence essential to
the accomplishment of basic social functions—that is, to the survival of
the society. Nonetheless, the moment arrives when the inner group is
contaminated. As soon as they are installed on a reservation, members of
a group tend to turn against one another. They can no longer polarize
their aggressions against outside enemies, the “others,” the “different
men.””

The chain of killings finally reaches the heart of the individual group. At
this point, the very basis of the social life of the group is challenged. In the
case of the Kaingang, outside factors—primarily the Brazilian author-
ities—intervened assuring the physical survival of the last remnants of the
Kaingang while guaranteeing the extinction of their culture.

In acknowledging the existence of an internal process of self-destruction
among the Kaingang, we are not attempting to diminish or dismiss the
part played by the white man in this tragedy. The problem of Brazilian
responsibility would not be resolved even if the new settlers had refrained
from using hired assassins to speed up the process of destruction. Indeed,
it is worth asking whether the impetus behind the Kaingang’s dis-
memberment of their culture and the inexorable character of their self-
destruction were not ultimately due to the pressure of a foreign culture.
Even if this were the case, cyclical violence still presents a threat to any
society, whether or not it is under pressure from a foreign culture or from
any other external interference. The process is basically internal.

Such is Henry’s conclusion after contemplating the terrible plight of the
Kaingang. He uses the phrase “social suicide,” and we must admit that the
potentiality for such self-destruction always exists. In the course of history
a number of communities doubtless succumbed to their own violent
impulses and disappeared without a trace. Even if we have certain reser-
vations about his interpretation of the case under discussion, Henry’s con-
clusions have direct pertinence to numberless groups of human beings
whose histories remain unknown. “This group, excellently suited in their
physical and psychological endowments to cope with the rigors of their
natural environment, were yet unable to withstand the internal forces
that were disrupting their society, and having no culturally standardized
devices to deal with them, were committing social suicide.”*

The fear generated by the kill-or-be-killed syndrome, the tendency
to “anticipate” violence by lashing out first (akin to our contemporary
concept of “preventive war”) cannot be explained in purely psychological
terms. The notion of a sacrificial crisis is designed to dissipate the psycho-
logical illusion; even in those instances when Henry borrows the language
of psychology, it is clear that he does not share the illusion. In a universe
both deprived of any transcendental code of justice and exposed to
violence, everybody has reason to fear the worst. The difference between
a projection of one’s own paranoia and an objective evaluation of circum-
stances has been worn away.’

Once that crucial distinction has vanished, both psychology and soci-
ology falter. The professional observer who distributes good or bad marks
to individuals and cultures on the basis of their “normality” and
“abnormality” is obliged to make his observations from the particular
perspective of someone who does not run the risk of being killed. Psycholo-
gists and other social scientists ordinarily suppose a peaceable sub-
structure for their subjects; indeed, they tend to take this pacific quality
for granted. Yet nothing in their mode of reasoning, which they like to
regard as radically “enlightened,” solidly based, and free of idealistic
nonsense, justifies such an assumption—as Henry’s study makes clear:
“With a single murder the murderer enters a locked system. He must kill
and kill again, he must plan whole massacres lest a single survivor remain
to avenge his kin.”*

Henry encountered some particularly bloodthirsty specimens among
the Kaingang, but he also fell in with individual members of the tribe who
were peaceable and perspicacious and who sought in vain to free them-
selves from the machinery of destruction. “Kaingang murderers are like
characters of a Greek tragedy in the grip of a natural law whose processes once
started can never be stayed.””

Although they approached the subject more obliquely, the Greek
tragedians were concerned, like Jules Henry, with the destruction of a
cultural order. The violent reciprocity that engulfs their characters is a
manifestation of this destructive process. Our own concern with sacrificial
matters shows the vital role the ritualistic crisis—the abolition of all dis-
tinctions—plays in the formation of tragedy. In turn, a study of tragedy
can clarify the nature of this crisis and those aspects of primitive religion
that are inseparably linked to it. For in the final analysis, the sole purpose
of religion is to prevent the recurrence of reciprocal violence.

I am inclined, then, to assert that tragedy opens a royal way to the great
dilemmas of religious ethnology. Such a stand will no doubt elicit the
scorn of “scientific” researchers as well as fervent Hellenophiles, from the
defenders of traditional humanism to the disciples of Nietzsche and
Heidegger. The scientifically inclined have a tendency to regard literary
folk as dubious company, whose society grows increasingly dangerous as
their own efforts remain obstinately theoretical. As for the Hellenophiles,
they are quick to see blasphemy in any parallel drawn between classical
Greece and primitive societies.

It is essential to make it clear, once and for all, that to draw on tragic
literature does not mean to relinquish scholarly standards of research; nor
does it constitute a purely “esthetic” approach to the subject. At the same
time we must manage to appease the men of letters who tremble at the
thought of applying scientific methods of any kind to literature, convinced
as they are that such methods can only lead to facile “reductionism” of the
works of art, to sterile analyses that disregard the spirit of the literature.
The conflict between the “two cultures,” science and literature, rests on a
common failure, a negative complicity shared by literary critics and
religious specialists. Neither group perceives the underlying principle on
which their objects are based. The tragedians seem to have labored in vain
to make this principle manifest. They never achieve more than partial
success, and their efforts are perpetually undone by the differentiations
imposed on their work by literary critics and social scientists.

Ethnologists are not unaware that ritual impurity is linked to the
dissolution of distinctions between individuals and_ institutions.'®
However, they fail to recognize the dangers inherent in this dissolution.
As we have noted, the modern mind has difficulty conceiving of violence
in terms of a loss of distinctions, or of a loss of distinctions in terms of
violence. Tragedy can help to resolve this difficulty if we agree to view the
plays from a radical perspective. Tragic drama addresses itself to a burning
issue—in fact, to the burning issue. The issue is never directly alluded to
in the plays, and for good reason, since it has to do with the dissolution by
reciprocal violence of those very values and distinctions around which
the conflict of the plays supposedly revolves. Because this subject is
taboo—and even more than taboo, almost unspeakable in the language
devoted to distinctions—literary critics proceed to obscure with their own
meticulously differentiated categories the relative lack of difference
between antagonists that characterizes a tragic confrontation in classical
drama.

The primitive mind, in contrast, has no difficulty imagining an
affiliation between violence and nondifferentiation and, indeed, is often
obsessed by the possible consequences of such a union. Natural differ-
ences are conceived in terms of cultural differences, and vice versa. Where
we would view the loss of a distinctive quality as a wholly natural
phenomenon having no bearing on human relationships, the primitive
man might well view this occurrence with deep dread. Because there is no
real difference between the various modes of differentiation, there is in
consequence no difference between the manner in which things fail to
differ; the disappearance of natural differences can thus bring to mind the
dissolution of regulations pertaining to the individual’s proper place in
society—that is, can instigate a sacrificial crisis.

Once we have grasped this fact, certain religious phenomena never
explained by traditional approaches suddenly become intelligible. A brief
glance at one of the more spectacular of these phenomena will, I think,
serve to demonstrate the usefulness of applying the tragic tradition to
religious ethnology.

In some primitive societies twins inspire a particular terror. It is not
unusual for one of the twins, and often both, to be put to death. The origin
of this terror has long puzzled ethnologists.

Today the enigma is presented as a problem of classification. Two
individuals suddenly appear, where only one had been expected; in those
societies that permit them to survive, twins often display a single social
personality. The problem of classification as defined by structuralism does
not justify the death of the twins. The reasons that prompt men to do
away with certain of their children are undoubtedly bad reasons, but they
are not frivolous ones. Culture is not merely a jigsaw puzzle where the
extra pieces are discarded once the picture has been completed. If the
problem of classification becomes crucial, that is because its implications
are crucial.

Twins invariably share a cultural identity, and they often have a striking
physical resemblance to each other. Wherever differences are lacking,
violence threatens. Between the biological twins and the sociological
twins there arises a confusion that grows more troubled as the question of
differences reaches a crisis. It is only natural that twins should awaken
fear, for they are harbingers of indiscriminate violence, the greatest
menace to primitive societies. As soon as the twins of violence appear they
multiply prodigiously, by scissiparity, as it were, and produce a sacrificial
crisis. It is essential to prevent the spread of this highly contagious disease.
When faced with biological twins the normal reaction of the culture is
simply to avoid contagion. The way primitive societies attempt to accom-
plish this offers a graphic demonstration of the kind of danger they associ-
ate with twins. In societies where their very existence is considered
dangerous, the infants are “exposed”; that is, abandoned outside the
community under conditions that make their death inevitable. Any act of
direct physical violence against the anathema is scrupulously avoided. Any
such act would only serve to entrap the perpetrators in a vicious circle of
violence—the trap “bad” violence sets for the community and baits with
the birth of twins.

An inventory of the customs, prescriptions, and interdictions relating to
twins in those societies where they are regarded with dread reveals one
common concern: the fear of pollution. The divergences from one culture
to the next are easily explained in terms of the religious attitudes defined
above, which pertain to the strictly empirical—that is, terrorstricken—
character of the precautions taken against “bad” violence. In the case of
twins, the precautions are misdirected; nevertheless, they become quite
intelligible once we recognize the terror that inspires them. Although the
menace is somewhat differently perceived from society to society, it is
fundamentally the same everywhere, and a challenge with which all
religious institutions are obliged to cope.

The Nyakyusa maintain that the parents of twins are contaminated by
“bad” violence, and there is a certain logic about that notion, since the
parents are, after all, responsible for engendering the twins. In reference
to the twins the parents are designated by a term that is applied to all
threatening individuals, all monstrous or terrifying creatures. In order to
prevent the spread of pollution the parents are required to isolate them-
selves and submit to rites of purification; only then are they allowed to
rejoin the community."

It is not unreasonable to believe that the relatives and close friends of
the twins’ parents, as well as their immediate neighbors, are those most
directly exposed to the infection. “Bad” violence is by definition a force
that works on various levels—physical, familial, social—and spreads from
one to the other.

Twins are impure in the same way that a warrior steeped in carnage is
impure, or an incestuous couple, or a menstruating woman. All forms of
violence lead back to violence. We overlook this fact because the primitive
concept of a link between the loss of distinctions and violence is strange to
us; but we need only consider the calamities primitive people associate
with twins to perceive the logic of this concept. Deadly epidemics can
result from contact with twins, as can mysterious illnesses that cause
sterility in women and animals. Even more significant to us is the role of
twins in provoking discord among neighbors, a fatal collapse of ritual,
the transgression of interdictions—in short, their part in instigating a
sacrificial crisis.

As we have seen, the sacred embraces all those forces that threaten to
harm man or trouble his peace. Natural forces and sickness are not
distinguished from the threat of a violent disintegration of the com-
munity. Although man-made violence plays a dominant role in the dia-
lectics of the sacred and is never completely omitted from the warnings
issued by religion, it tends to be relegated to the background and treated
as if it emanated from outside man. One might say that it has been delib-
erately hidden away almost out of sight behind forces that are genuinely
exterior to man.

Behind the image of twins lurks the baleful aspect of the sacred,
perceived as a disparate but formidably unified force. The sacrificial crisis
can be viewed as a general offensive of violence directed against the
community, and there is reason to fear that the birth of twins might
herald this crisis.

In the primitive societies where twins are not killed they often enjoy a
privileged position. This reversal corresponds to the attitudes we have
noted in regard to menstrual blood. Any phenomenon linked to impure
violence is capable of being inverted and rendered beneficent; but this can
take place only within the immutable and rigorous framework of ritual
practice. The purifying and pacifying aspects of violence take precedence
over its destructive aspects. The apparition of twins, then, if properly
handled, may in certain societies be seen to presage good events, not bad
ones.

If the statements above are valid, two brothers need not be twins for
their resemblances to arouse anxiety. We can assume almost a priori that
in some societies the mere fact of familial similarity is cause for alarm. The
verification of such a hypothesis would, I believe, confirm the inadequacy
of previous theories regarding twins. If the twin phobia can be extended
to other members of the family it can no longer be explained solely in
terms of “a problem of classification.” Twins could no longer be said to
cause alarm because two individuals had turned up where only one
was expected; their physical resemblance would now be perceived as the
disruptive factor.

At this point we may well wonder how something so commonplace as
the resemblance between siblings can be officially proscribed without
causing enormous inconvenience, not to say total chaos. After all, a
community cannot categorize a majority of its inhabitants as probation-
ary criminals without creating an intolerable situation. Nevertheless, the
phobia of resemblance is a fact. Malinowski’s The Father in Primitive
Psychology offers formal proof. The study demonstrates how the phobia
can perpetuate itself without disastrous consequences. The ingenuity of
man, or rather of his cultural systems, copes with the problem by
categorically denying the existence of the dreaded phenomenon, or even
its possibility:

In a matrilineal society, as in the Trobriands, where all maternal relatives are
considered to be of the “same body,” and the father to be a “stranger,” we
would naturally expect and have no doubt that the facial and bodily similarity
would be traced to the mother’s family alone. The contrary is the case, and this
is affirmed with an extremely strong social emphasis. Not only is it a household
dogma, so to speak, that a child never resembles its mother, any of its brothers
or sisters, or any of its maternal kinsmen, but it is extremely bad form and a
great offence to hint at any such similarity. ...

I was introduced to this rule of savoir vivre in the usual way by making a
faux pas. One of my bodyguards in Omarakana, named Moradeda, was
endowed with a peculiar cast of features which had struck me at first sight... .
One day I was struck by the appearance of an exact counterpart to Moradeda
and asked his name and whereabouts. When I was told that he was my friend’s
elder brother, living in a distant village, I exclaimed: “Ah, truly! I asked about
you because your face is alike—alike to that of Moradeda.” There came such a
hush over all the assembly that I noticed it at once. The man turned round and
left us, while part of the company present, after looking away in a manner
half-embarrassed, half-offended, soon dispersed. I was then told by my con-
fidential informants that I had committed a breach of custom, that I had per-
petrated what is called “taputaki migila,” a technical expression referring only
to this act, which might be translated: “to-defile-by-comparing-to-a-kinsman-
his-face.” What astonished me in this discussion was, that in spite of the strik-
ing resemblance between the two brothers, my informants refused to admit it.
In fact, they treated the question as if no one could possibly ever resemble
his brother, or, for the matter of that, any maternal kinsman. I made my
informants quite angry and displeased with me by arguing the point.

This incident taught me never to hint at such a resemblance in the presence
of the people concerned. But I thrashed the matter out well with many natives
in subsequent general conversations. I found that every one in the Trobriands
will, in the teeth of all the evidence, deny stoutly that similarity can exist
between matrilineal kinsmen. You simply irritate and insult a Trobriander if
you point to striking instances, exactly as you irritate your next-door neighbor
in our own society if you bring before him a glaring truth which contradicts
some of his cherished opinions, political, religious, or moral, or which is still
worse, runs counter to his personal interests. '”

Negation here serves as affirmation. There would be nothing untoward
in mentioning resemblances if they were not a matter of great import-
ance. To accuse two close relatives of resembling one another is to assert
that they are a menace to the community, the carriers of an infectious
disease. Malinowski tells us further that the accusation is a traditional
form of insult among the Trobriands, the most wounding at their dis-
posal. His account inspires confidence precisely because he presents
the phenomenon as a complete enigma, proposing no interpretation of
his own.

On the other hand, the Trobriands not only tolerate references to the
resemblance between fathers and children but virtually demand its
acknowledgment. This society formally denies the father’s role in the
reproductive process; between father and children, then, no parental link
is said to exist.

Malinowski’s description demonstrates that a paternal resemblance is
perceived by the Trobriands, paradoxically enough, in terms of differences. It
is the father who serves to differentiate the children from one another. He
is literally the bearer of a difference, among whose characteristics we
recognize the phallic element so dear to psychoanalysts. Because the
father sleeps with the mother, because he is so often near her, he is said to
“mold the face of the child.” Malinowski informs us that the word kuli—
“coagulate,” “mold,” “leave an impression”—recurred constantly in the
discussions of resemblances. The father evidently represents form, the
mother matter. In this capacity the father makes the children different
from their mother and from one another. That explains why the children
resemble him, and why a resemblance to the father, common to all children,
does not imply a resemblance of one child to another: “It was often pointed out
to me how strongly one or the other of the sons of To’uluwa, chief of
Omarakana, resembled his father. ... Whenever I pointed out that this
similarity to the father implied similarity among each other, such a heresy
was indignantly repudiated.”!*

At this point it seems appropriate to juxtapose the basic mythical theme
of enemy brothers with the phobia concerning twins and other fraternal
resemblances. Clyde Kluckhohn asserts that the most common of all
mythical conflicts is the struggle between brothers, which generally ends
in fratricide. In some regions of black Africa the mythical protagonists are
brothers “born in immediate sequence.”"* If I understand this phrase cor-
rectly, it includes twins but is not strictly limited to them. The continuity
between the theme of twins and the fraternal motif in general is not
peculiar to the Trobriand Islands.

Even when the brothers are not twins, the difference between them is
less than that between all other degrees of relations. They share the same
mother, father, gender; in most instances they occupy the same position
in respect to other relatives, both close and distant. Brothers seem to have
more rights, duties, and functions in common than other family members.
Twins are in a sense reinforced brothers whose final objective difference,
that of age, has been removed; it is virtually impossible to distinguish
between them.

We instinctively tend to regard the fraternal relationship as an
affectionate one; yet the mythological, historical, and literary examples
that spring to mind tell a different story: Cain and Abel, Jacob and Esau,
Eteocles and Polyneices, Romulus and Remus, Richard the Lion-Hearted
and John Lackland. The proliferation of enemy brothers in Greek myth
and in dramatic adaptations of myth implies the continual presence of a
sacrificial crisis, repeatedly alluded to in the same symbolic terms. The
fraternal theme is no less “contagious” qua theme for being buried deep in
the text than is the malevolent violence that accompanies it. In fact, the
theme itself is a form of violence.

When Polyneices departs from Thebes, leaving his brother to take his
turn on the throne, he carries the fraternal conflict with him as an integral
part of his being. Everywhere he goes he literally draws from the earth the
brother who seems expressly designed to thwart him, just as Cadmus
sowed the dragon’s teeth and brought forth a harvest of fully armed
warriors ready to do battle with one another.

An oracle had announced to Adrastus that his two daughters would
marry a lion and a wild boar respectively—animals very different in
appearance, but of equally violent temper. In Euripides’ Supplices Adrastus
recounts how he came upon his future sons-in-law Polyneices and
Tydeus, both poverty-stricken exiles who were fighting for shelter outside
his door:

Adrastus: The two exiles came to my door one night.

Theseus: Which two? What were their names?

Adrastus: Tydeus and Polyneices. And each fell on the other’s throat.

Theseus: And you recognized them as the beasts for whom your daughters
were destined?

Adrastus: They looked exactly like two wild beasts.

Theseus: How had they wandered so far from their homeland?

Adrastus: Tydeus was banished for having killed a kinsman.

Theseus: And Oedipus’s son, why had he left Thebes?

Adrastus: A father’s curse: that he should kill his brother.

The ferocity of the two young men, the symmetry of their family
situations, and their forthcoming marriages to two sisters—reconstituting,
as it were, a properly “fraternal” relationship—all conspire to recreate the
Polyneices/Eteocles relationship and, indeed, all other instances of
fraternal rivalry.

Once our attention has been drawn to the “distinctive” traits of
fraternal strife we seem to rediscover them, recurring singly or in clusters,
throughout classical myth and tragedy. In addition to true brothers, such
as Eteocles and Polyneices, we find brothers-in-law (that is, quasi-
brothers), like Polyneices and Tydeus, Oedipus and Creon; or other close
relatives of the same generation, like the first cousins Pentheus and
Dionysus. Ultimately, the insufficient difference in the family relation-
ships serves to symbolize the dissolution of family distinctions; in other
words, it desymbolizes. Such relationships thus finally contribute to the
symmetry of conflicts that is concealed in myth, but vigorously
proclaimed in tragedy, which betrays this hidden process simply by
representing the mythological material on stage.

Nothing can be further from the truth than the statement that tragedy
lacks universality because it is totally preoccupied with family distinc-
tions. It is the elimination of these distinctions that leads directly to
fraternal strife and to the religious phobia regarding twins. The two
themes are essentially the same; however, there is a shade of difference
between them that deserves our attention.

Twins offer a symbolic representation, sometimes remarkably eloquent,
of the symmetrical conflict and identity crisis that characterize the
sacrificial crisis. But the resemblance is entirely accidental. There is no real
connection between biological and sociological twins; twins are no more
predisposed to violence than any other men—or, at least, any other
brothers. There is something decidedly arbitrary about the relationship
between sacrificial crises and the essential quality of twinship, which is
not of the same order of arbitrariness as that of the linguistic sign, since
the representative element is always present. Ultimately, the classic defin-
ition of the symbol seems to apply to the correspondence between twins
and the sacrificial crisis.

In the case of fraternal strife the representative element becomes
blurred. Fraternal relationships normally take form within the framework
of the family, where differences, no matter how small, are readily recog-
nized and acknowledged. In passing from twins to the general category of
brothers, we lose something on the level of symbolic representation, but
gain something on that of social reality; in fact, the shift puts our feet
securely on the ground. Because in most societies the fraternal relation-
ship implies only a minimum of differences, it obviously constitutes a
vulnerable point in a system structured on differences, a point danger-
ously exposed to the onset of a sacrificial crisis. The fear of twins, qua
twins, is clearly mythic and has little basis in reality, but one can hardly
say the same for the thematic concern with fraternal rivalry. It is not only
in myths that brothers are simultaneously drawn together and driven
apart by something they both ardently desire and which they will not or
cannot share—a throne, a woman or, in more general terms, a paternal
heritage.

Rival brothers, unlike twins, straddle both forms of “desymbolization,”
the purely symbolic and the concrete variety—the variety that constitutes
the true sacrifical crisis. In some African monarchies the death of the king
precipitates a struggle for the succession and transforms the king’s sons
into fraternal enemies. It is difficult if not impossible to determine to what
extent this struggle is symbolic, a matter of ritual, and to what extent it is a
real historical event, pregnant with unforeseen consequences. In other
words, it is hard to know whether one is dealing with a real-life struggle or
with ritual mimicry whose cathartic effects are believed to ward off the
impending crisis it imitates so faithfully.

If we have difficulty grasping what twins, or even rival brothers,
represent, it is because we do not consider their presence a genuine
threat. We cannot imagine how the mere appearance of a pair of twins or
rival brothers can convey the entire course of sacrificial crisis; how the
pair can epitomize the entire crisis, in terms not of formal rhetoric but of real
violence. Any violent effacement of differences, even if initially restricted
to a single pair of twins, reaches out to destroy a whole society.

We cannot be held entirely responsible for our lack of comprehension.
None of the mythological themes can, by itself, point to the truth concern-
ing the sacrificial crisis. In the case of twins, symmetry and identity are
represented in extraordinarily explicit terms; nondifference is present in
concrete, literal form, but this form is itself so exceptional as to constitute
a new difference. Thus the representation of nondifference ultimately
becomes the very exemplar of difference, a classic monstrosity that plays a
vital role in sacred ritual.

In the case of enemy brothers the domestic context in which they
operate brings us back into contact with reality: we are no longer dealing
with outlandish phenomena that provoke either amusement or dread.
But the very concreteness of the conflict tends to efface its symbolic sig-
nificance; to lend it the character of a real historical event. With enemy
brothers, as with twins, the sign cannot fail to betray the thing signified
because that “thing” is the destruction of all signification. It is violent
reciprocity, on the rampage everywhere, that truly destroys differences;
yet this process can never be fully signified. Either a degree of difference
survives and we remain within the framework of a cultural order,
surrounded by meanings that ought to have been wiped out. Or perhaps
all differences have indeed been effaced, but the nondifference immedi-
ately appears as a new and outlandish difference, a monstrosity such as
twins, for example.

Being made up of differences, language finds it almost impossible to
express undifferentiation directly. Whatever it may say on the subject,
language invariably says at once too much and too little, even in such
concise statements as “Each thing meets/In mere oppugnancy” or “sound
and fury,/Signifying nothing.”

No matter how diligently language attempts to catch hold of it, the
reality of the sacrifical crisis invariably slips through its grasp. It invites
anecdotal history on the one hand, and on the other, a visitation of
monsters and grotesques. Mythology succumbs to the latter; tragedy is
constantly threatened by the former.

Monstrosities recur throughout mythology. From this we can only
conclude that myths make constant reference to the sacrificial crisis, but
do so only in order to disguise the issue. Myths are the retrospective
transfiguration of sacrificial crises, the reinterpretation of these crises in
the light of the cultural order that has arisen from them.

The traces of sacrificial crisis are less distinct in myth than in tragedy. Or
rather, tragedy is by its very nature a partial deciphering of mythological
motifs. The poet brings the sacrificial crisis back to life; he pieces together
the scattered fragments of reciprocity and balances elements thrown out
of kilter in the process of being “mythologized.” He whistles up a storm of
violent reciprocity, and differences are swept away in this storm just as
they were previously dissolved in the real crisis that must have generated
the mythological transfiguration.

Tragedy envelops all human relationships in a single tragic antagonism.
It does not differentiate between the fraternal conflict of Eteocles and
Polyneices, the father-son conflict of Alcestis or Oedipus the King, the
conflict between men who share no ancestral ties, such as Oedipus and
Tiresias. The rivalry of the two prophets is indistinguishable from the
rivalry between brothers. Tragedy tends to restore violence to mytho-
logical themes. It in part fulfills the dire forebodings primitive men experi-
ence at the sight of twins. It spreads the pollution abroad and multiplies
the mirror images of violence.

Tragedy has a particular affinity for myth, but that does not mean it
takes the same course. The term desymbolism is more appropriate to tragedy
than is symbolism. It is because most of the symbols of the sacrificial crisis—
in particular the symbol of the enemy brother—lend themselves so readily
to both the tragic and the ritual situations that tragedy has been able to
operate, at least to some extent, within and also contrary to mythological
patterns. I have already noted this dual aspect of symbolic reference in
connection with the monarchic succession in certain African states; it is
virtually impossible to determine whether the fraternal rivalry that occurs
in that connection is ritualistic or part of the “tragedy of history.”

Symbolized reality becomes, paradoxically, the loss of all symbolism;
the loss of differences is necessarily betrayed by the differentiated expres-
sion of language. The process is a peculiar one, utterly foreign to our usual
notions of symbolism. Only a close reading of tragedy, a radically
“symmetrical” reading, will help us to understand the phenomenon, to
penetrate to the source of tragic inspiration. If the tragic poet touches
upon the violent reciprocity underlying all myths, it is because he per-
ceives these myths in a context of weakening distinctions and growing
violence. His work is inseparable, then, from a new sacrificial crisis, the
one referred to at the opening of this chapter.

To know violence is to experience it. Tragedy is therefore directly linked
to violence; it is a child of the sacrificial crisis. The relationship between


tragedy and myth as it is now taking shape can perhaps be understood
more easily if we consider an analogous relationship, that of the Old
Testament prophets to the Pentateuchal texts they cite as exemplars. For
example, we find in Jeremiah (9:3-5):

Beware a brother,

for every brother plays the role of Jacob,
and every friend spreads scandal.

One deceives the other. . . .

Fraud upon fraud, deceit upon deceit.

The concept of enemy brothers previously mentioned in connection
with Jacob is precisely the same as the concept governing Euripides’ ver-
sion of the Eteocles/Polyneices story. It is the symmetry of the conflict that
defines the fraternal relationship, and this symmetry, originally limited to
a few tragic heroes, now reaches out to include the entire community. It
loses its particularized quality and acquires a predominantly social mean-
ing. The allusion to Jacob is subordinated to the main design, which is the
description of the sacrificial crisis; violence engulfs the whole society, all
its members confronting one another as enemy brothers. Specific stylistic
effects underline the symmetry and mirror the violent reciprocity: “One
deceives the other... . Fraud upon fraud, deceit upon deceit.”

The books of the Old Testament are rooted in sacrificial crises, each
distinct from the other and separated by long intervals of time, but analo-
gous in at least some respects. The earlier crises are reinterpreted in the
light of the later ones. And the experience of previous crises is of great
value in coping with subsequent ones. Jeremiah’s treatment of the histor-
ical figure of Jacob seems to bear this out. Contact has been established
between the time of Genesis and the crisis of the sixth century; as a result,
light is shed on both eras. Like tragedy, the prophetic act constitutes a
return to violent reciprocity; so it, too, levels all mythological distinctions
and does so even more effectively than tragedy. However, this leads us to
a subject that deserves separate consideration, a subject I will turn to in
another work.

Although the source of inspiration emerges more dimly and indirectly
in tragedy than in biblical examples, the pattern is the same. The passage
quoted above might well be taken for a fragment of a tragic drama drawn
from the Book of Genesis—a tragedy of enemy brothers, perhaps Jacob
and Esau.

Tragic and prophetic inspiration do not draw strength from historical or
philological sources but from a direct intuitive grasp of the role played by
violence in the cultural order and in disorder as well, in mythology and in
the sacrificial crisis. England, in the throes of religious upheaval, provided
Shakespeare with such an inspiration for his Troilus and Cressida. There is
no reason to believe that advances in scholarship will, by the process of
continuous enrichment so dear to the positivist cause, increase our under-
standing of the great tragedies; for however real and valuable this process
may be, it fails to touch on the true tragic spirit. This spirit, never wide-
spread even in periods of crisis, vanishes without a trace during periods of
cultural stability.

At a given moment the violent effacement of distinctions ceases and
the process begins to reverse itself, giving way to mythical elaboration.
Mythical elaboration gives way in turn to the inverse operation of tragic
inspiration. What sets off these metamorphoses? What mechanism gov-
erns the shift from cultural order to disorder? This is the question that
concerns us; and this question elicits yet another, which touches on the
final stages of the sacrificial crisis. Once violence has penetrated a com-
munity it engages in an orgy of self-propagation. There appears to be no
way of bringing the reprisals to a halt before the community has been
annihilated.

If there are really such events as sacrificial crises, some sort of braking
mechanism, an automatic control that goes into effect before everything is
destroyed, must be built into them. In the final stages of a sacrifical crisis
the very viability of human society is put in question. Our task is to dis-
cover what these final stages involve and what makes them possible. It is
likely that they must serve as a point of departure for both ritual and
myth. Everything we can learn about this phase of the crisis, then, will
enhance our knowledge of the nature of ritual and myth.

To find an answer to these questions let us address ourselves to one
myth in particular, the story of Oedipus. Our previous investigations gave
us reason to believe that the most useful approach lay by way of tragedy.
We will turn our attention, therefore, to Sophocles’ Oedipus the King.

Notes

1 Victor Turner, The Ritual Process (Chicago, 1969), p. 179.
2 Jules Henry, Jungle People (New York, 1964).


3 Ibid., p. 50.

4 Ibid., p. 51.

5 The Kaingang use one and the same term to refer to (1) differences of all
kinds; (2) men of rival groups, who are always close relatives; (3) Brazilians,
the traditional enemy; and (4) the dead and all mythological figures, demonic
and divine, generally spoken of as “different things.”

6 Henry, Jungle People, p. 7.

7 “When Yakwa says to me, ‘My cousin wants to kill me,’ I know he wants to
kill his cousin, who slaughtered his pigs for rooting up his corn: and when he
says, ‘Eduardo (the Agent) is angry with me,’ I realize that he is angry with
the Agent for not having given him a shirt. Yakwa’s state of mind is a pale
reflection of the Kaingang habit of projecting their own hate and fear into the
minds of those whom they hate and fear. Yet one cannot always be sure that
it is just a projection, for in these feuds currents of danger may radiate from
any number of points of conflict, and there is often good and sufficient cause
for any fear” (ibid., p. 54).

8 Ibid., p. 53.

9 Ibid.

10 Cf. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger (London, 1966).

11 Monica Wilson, Rituals of Kinship among the Nyakyusa (Oxford, 1957).

12 Bronislaw Malinowski, The Father in Primitive Psychology (New York, 1966),
pp. 88-91.

13 Ibid., p. 92.

14 Clyde Kluckhohn, “Recurrent Themes in Myths and Mythmaking,” in Myth
and Mythmaking, ed. Henry A. Murray (Boston, 1968), p. 52.



Oedipus and the Surrogate Victim


Sophocles is often praised for having created in Oedipus a highly
individualized character. Here, it is said, is a hero who is very much his
own man. And what sort of a man is he? It is traditional to note both his
“generosity,” and his “impulsiveness.” At the opening of the play we
admire his “noble serenity,” as he dedicates himself to solving the mystery
of the plague that afflicts his subjects. But the least obstacle, delay, or
provocation suffices to upset his poise. The diagnosis seems clear: Oedipus
is prone to fits of anger. The king himself acknowledges this fault, present-
ing it, so it seems, as that unique but fatal flaw without which a hero
cannot attain tragic stature.

The “noble serenity” is in evidence first; the fits of anger follow. Tiresias
provokes the initial outburst, Creon the second. In Oedipus’s own
account of his past life he informs us that he has frequently succumbed to
this “flaw.” He admits to overreacting to hasty phrases heedlessly uttered;
a drinking companion in Corinth had blurted out some remark casting
doubt on Oedipus’s parentage; Oedipus reacted with an outburst of anger
that precipitated his departure from the city. And it was in a fit of anger
that he struck down at the crossroads an old man who blocked his way.

The description of his character seems unambiguous, and anger is surely
as good a word as any to use in describing the personal reactions of the
hero. However, we cannot help asking ourselves whether these tantrums
really serve to distinguish Oedipus from the other characters. In other
words, can they be said to perform the differential function upon which
the whole concept of “character” is based?

If we look closely at the myth we notice that “anger” crops up
everywhere. It was a kind of suppressed anger that incited Oedipus’s
companion at Corinth to cast doubt on the hero’s parentage. At the fateful
crossroads it was anger that goaded Laius initially to raise a hand against
his son. It was yet an earlier act of anger, preceding any actions by Oedipus,
that prompted the father’s decision to do away with his infant son.

It is clear that Oedipus has no monopoly on anger in the play. Whatever
the author’s intentions, there would be no tragic debate if the other prot-
agonists did not become angry in turn. It is true that these outbursts only
occur after a certain delay; and it is tempting to regard them as “justified
reprisals,” warranted by Oedipus’s inexcusable and provoking displays of
temper. But we have seen that Oedipus’s anger is never without ante-
cedents; it is always preceded and determined by an initial outburst. Even
that initial anger is never truly the original anger. In the domain of impure
violence, any search for origins leads back to myth. One cannot engage in
a search of this sort, much less place any credence in the ultimate success
of such a search, without destroying violent reciprocity; without, in short,
having recourse to those very mythological distinctions from which
tragedy is striving to extricate itself.

Tiresias and Creon keep their tempers at the outset: their initial serenity
is matched by Oedipus’s own serenity in the first episode. In fact, we have
to do with an alternation of calm and anger. The only distinction between
Oedipus and his adversaries is that Oedipus initiates the contest, triggering
the tragic plot. He thus has a certain head start on the others. But though
the action does not occur simultaneously, its symmetry is absolute. Each
protagonist in turn occupies the same position in regard to the same
object. This object is none other than the particular tragic conflict whose
association with the plague we have already noted and will explore in
more detail further on. At first, each of the protagonists believes that he
can quell the violence; at the end each succumbs to it. All are drawn
unwittingly into the structure of violent reciprocity—which they always
think they are outside of, because they all initially come from the outside
and mistake this positional and temporary advantage for a permanent and
fundamental superiority.

The three protagonists believe themselves to be above the battle. After
all, Oedipus is not from Thebes, Creon is not king, and Tiresias is soaring
aloft, high amid the clouds. Creon returns from Thebes armed with the
latest oracle. Oedipus and especially Tiresias bring to bear their formidable
divinatory skills. In this capacity they possess all the prestige of the
modern “expert,” whose services are reserved for exceptionally difficult
cases. Each believes himself to be an impartial observer, detached from the
action; each wants to assume the role of arbitrator and judge. The solem-
nity of the three sages rapidly gives way to fury, however, when each sees
his prestige challenged—if only by the silence of the other two.

The force exerted by the three men in the struggle corresponds to each
man’s illusion of superiority, his hubris. In other words, nobody possesses
sophrosyne, and on that level, too, the differences among them are illu-
sory or quickly effaced. The passage from calm to anger is in each case
rendered inevitable. It seems arbitrary, therefore, to relegate to Oedipus,
as a distinctive “character trait,” an attribute shared equally by all—
especially if this common attribute is drawn from the tragic context of the
play and provides a more coherent interpretation than the psychological
approach allows.

Far from bringing differences into sharp relief, the plunge into
opposition reduces the protagonists to a uniform condition of violence;
they are engulfed in the same storm of passion. A single glance at an
Oedipus drunk with violence and eager to engage him in “dialogue” con-
vinces Tiresias that he has been led astray. But the knowledge comes too
late: “Alas, alas, how terrible to know the truth, when this knowledge
serves for naught. I was not totally ignorant of this truth, but had thrust it
from my mind. Otherwise I would not have come.”

Tragedy is not a matter of differing opinions. The symmetrical quality of
the conflict determines the limits of the tragic inspiration. And in asserting
that there is no difference between the antagonists in a tragedy, we are
saying that ultimately there is no difference between the “true” and the
“false” prophet. The statement seems ridiculous, even unthinkable, at first
glance. For does not Tiresias proclaim the truth about Oedipus at the
outset, while Oedipus is vilifying Tiresias with odious calumnies?

With Tiresias’s entrance our quest for symmetry receives a sharp rebuff.
As soon as it catches sight of this stately personage, the chorus exclaims:

Here approaches the most inspired of prophets,
he alone who is the keeper of hidden truth.

Clearly we are dealing here with the infallible and omniscient
prophet, the sole possessor of an indubitable verity, long ripened in the
keeping. For once, it seems, difference has triumphed. However, some
lines further on this difference is eclipsed; we encounter a resurgence of
reciprocity, more explicit than ever. Tiresias himself rejects the traditional
interpretation of his role, the very one proposed by the chorus. In reply
to Oedipus, who has questioned him derisively on the origins of his
prophetic gifts, Tiresias denies that he possesses any truth except the truth
conferred on him by Oedipus himself:

Oedipus: Who taught you truth? Was it part of your training as a prophet?
Tiresias: You taught me, in forcing me to speak against my will.

If we take Tiresias’s reply literally, the terrible charges of patricide and
incest that he has just leveled at Oedipus did not stem from any super-
natural source of information. The accusation is simply an act of reprisal
arising from the hostile exchange ofa tragic debate. Oedipus unintention-
ally initiates the process by forcing Tiresias to speak. He accuses Tiresias of
having had a part in the murder of Laius; he prods Tiresias into reprisal,
into hurling the accusation back at him.

The only difference between the initial accusation and the counter-
charge is the paradoxical quality of the latter. This quality, which could
well be a weakness, in fact becomes an added strength. Tiresias, not con-
tent to answer Oedipus’s “You are guilty,” by echoing, “You are guilty,”
underlines what from his point of view is the most scandalous aspect of
the accusation—a guilty man is leveling the charge: “You pronounce me
guilty and think yourself innocent whereas, O wondrous world, the guilty
one is you. The criminal you pursue is none other than Oedipus.”

To accuse the other of Laius’s murder is to attribute to him sole
responsibility for the sacrificial crisis; but as we have seen, everybody
shares equal responsibility, because everybody participates in the destruc-
tion of a cultural order. The blows exchanged by enemy brothers may not
always land on their mark, but every one of them deals a staggering blow
to the institutions of monarchy and religion. Each party progresses rapidly
in uncovering the truth about the other, without ever recognizing the
truth about himself.

Each sees in the other the usurper of a legitimacy that he thinks he is
defending but that he is in fact undermining. Anything one may affirm or
deny about either of the adversaries seems instantly applicable to the
other. Reciprocity is busy aiding each party in his own destruction. The
tragic debate is clearly the verbal equivalent of the fight between such
enemy brothers as Eteocles and Polyneices.

In a series of replies Tiresias warns Oedipus of the purely reciprocal
nature of the approaching tragedy; that is, of the blows that each will
inflict on the other. As far as I know, nobody has proposed a satisfactory
interpretation of these lines. The very rhythm of the phrases, their
symmetrical effects, anticipate and provoke the tragic debate. We see here
violent reciprocity in action, canceling all distinctions between the
two men:

Enough. Let me go home now. If you follow my advice, we will both find it
easier to bear our separate destinies. . . .

Ah! I see that your own words fall wide of the mark; and I fear to have no
better success with mine. ...

I do not want to inflict pain on either of us....

You reproach me for my stubbornness, but refuse to see the stubbornness that
dwells within you; and therefore out of stubbornness cast blame on me... .

The violent elimination of differences between the antagonists, their
total identity, suddenly illuminates these responses, which give perfect
expression to the true nature of tragic relationships. The fact that these
responses, even today, still seem obscure, confirms our lack of under-
standing. It should be said, however, that there is good reason for this
lack: one cannot persevere in bringing to light the symmetrical quality of
tragedy—as we are now doing—without contradicting the fundamental
implications of the myth.

If the myth does not explicitly set forth the problem of differences, it
nonetheless manages to resolve the problem in a matter both brutal and
categorical. The solution involves patricide and incest. In the mythical
version of the story the issue of reciprocity—the identity of Oedipus with
the others—never arises. One can assert with total conviction that Oedipus
is unique in at least one respect: he alone is guilty of patricide and incest.
He is presented as a monstrous exception to the general run of mankind;
he resembles nobody, and nobody resembles him.

The tragedian’s version of the Oedipus story differs radically from the
myth; indeed, it is impossible to do justice to this presentation without
abandoning the myth altogether. Interpreters of Sophocles’ play invari-
ably devise compromises that conceal the underlying contradiction
between the tragedy and the myth. I shall not have recourse to these
venerable compromises, nor try to invent new ones. My quest leads
elsewhere; I intend to trace the tragic vein to its source, if only to see
where it leads. I hope this exploration will yield something of value about
the genesis of the myth.

First let us return to the issues of patricide and incest and attempt to
determine whether these crimes can be attributed to one particular prot-
agonist, and to one alone. As we have seen, the tragedy transforms the
murder of Laius, and the patricide and incest themselves, into an
exchange of mutual incriminations. Oedipus and Tiresias each attempt to
place the blame for the city’s plight on the other; the accusations of patri-
cide and incest are only especially striking contributions to a conventional
exchange of incivilities. At this stage of the debate there is no reason to
assume that either party is more guilty of any crime than the other. Both
sides seem equally matched; neither seems able to gain the upper hand.
The myth breaks the deadlock, however, and does so unequivocally. We
must now, in the light of our understanding of tragic reciprocity, examine
on what basis and under what conditions the myth succeeds in intervening
decisively in the struggle.

At this point a strange and well-nigh fantastic thought suggests itself. If
we eliminate the testimony brought against Oedipus in the second half of
the tragedy, then the conclusion of the myth, far from seeming a sudden
lightning flash of the truth, striking down the guilty party and illuminat-
ing all the mortal participants, seems nothing more than the camouflaged
victory of one version of the story over the other, the polemical version
over its rival—the community’s formal acceptance of Tiresias’s and
Creon’s version of the story, thereafter held to be the true and universal
version, the verity behind the myth itself.

At this point the reader may well suspect that I harbor some strange
illusions about the “historical” potential of these texts and about the
information that one may reasonably expect to draw out of them. I hope
that what follows will help to dissipate these fears. However, before pro-
ceeding I feel obliged to address myself to another type of objection that
the present inquiry seems certain to attract.

Literary criticism concerns itself with tragedy; mythology is outside
its proper bailiwick. Students of mythology, on the other hand, exclude
tragedy from their area of concern and even display on occasion a hostile
attitude toward it.

This division of labor harks back to Aristotle, who declares in the
Poetics that the competent tragic poet will avoid manipulating the myths
and limit his borrowings from them to certain “subjects.” This interdict
of Aristotle still stands in the way of our confronting the symmetrical
quality of tragedy and the mythical concern with differences, which pro-
tects “literature” from “mythology” and also protects their respective
specialists from the subversive consequences that might result from a
confrontation.

It is precisely this confrontation I want to emphasize. Indeed, one can-
not but wonder how attentive readers of Oedipus the King have managed to
overlook it. At the climactic moment of the tragic struggle Sophocles has
inserted into his text two replies that seem to pertain directly to our read-
ing. Oedipus’s imminent fall has nothing to do with any heinous sin;
rather, it should be regarded as the outcome of a tragic encounter in
which Oedipus has met defeat. Oedipus replies to the chorus, which has
pleaded with him to spare Creon: “What you are asking, if the truth be
told, is neither more nor less than my death or exile.”

The chorus insists that Creon does not deserve punishment; he should
be allowed to withdraw in peace. Oedipus yields to their request, but
reluctantly, and he reminds the chorus once again of the true nature of
this struggle whose outcome is still unclear. To spare an enemy brother
from death or exile is to condemn oneself to death or exile: “Well, then, let
him depart—though his departure means my certain death, or else my
ignominious expulsion from Thebes.”

Should we follow tradition and attribute such responses to the “tragic
illusion”? In that case the whole play and its wondrous equilibrium must
also be a figment of this same illusion. We will be on safer ground, I
believe, if we turn our attention from “tragic illusion” to tragic vision. I
cannot help feeling that Sophocles himself is prompting us to do so.

Yet Sophocles himself remains elusive. Tragic subversion has its limits; if
the playwright challenges the basis of the myth, he only dares to do so in
muted and devious fashion. He does not want to compromise his own
enterprise or demolish the mythological framework in which he operates.

We are left with no model or guide; we are engaged in a cultural activity
that remains undefined, and we can have recourse to no known critical
discipline. What we are about to do is as novel to tragedy or literary
criticism as it is to psychoanalysis or ethnology.

We must return once again to the so-called crimes of the son of Laius.
The act of regicide is the exact equivalent, vis-a-vis the polis, of the act of
patricide vis-a-vis the family. In both cases the criminal strikes at the most
fundamental, essential, and inviolable distinction within the group. He
becomes, literally, the slayer of distinctions.

Patricide represents the establishment of violent reciprocity between
father and son, the reduction of the paternal relationship to “fraternal”
revenge. This reciprocity is explicitly indicated in the tragedy; as we
have noted, Laius displays violence towards Oedipus even before his son
actually attacks him.

When it has succeeded in abolishing even the traditional father-son
relationship, violent reciprocity is left in sole command of the battle-field.
Its victory could hardly be more complete, for in pitting father against son
it has chosen as the basis of their rivalry an object solemnly consecrated as
belonging to the father and formally forbidden the son: that is, the father’s
wife and son’s mother. Incest is also a form of violence, an extreme form,
and it plays in consequence an extreme role in the destruction of differ-
ences. It destroys that other crucial family distinction, that between the
mother and her children. Between patricide and incest, the violent aboli-
tion of all family differences is achieved. The process that links violence to
the loss of distinctions will naturally perceive incest and patricide as its
ultimate goals. No possibility of difference then remains; no aspect of life is
immune from the onslaught of violence.'

Patricide and incest will thus be defined in terms of their consequences.
Oedipus’s monstrosity is contagious; it infects first of all those beings
engendered by him. The essential task is to separate once more the two
strains of blood whose poisonous blend is now perpetuated by the natural
process of generation. Incestuous propagation leads to formless duplica-
tions, sinister repetitions, a dark mixture of unnamable things. In short,
the incestuous creature exposes the community to the same danger as do
twins. These are indeed the manifestations, real and transfigured, of the
sacrificial crisis always referred to by primitive societies in connection
with incest. Indeed, the mothers of twins are often suspected of having
conceived their children in incestuous fashion.

Sophocles attributes Oedipus’s incest to the influence of the god
Hymen, who after all is directly implicated in the affair as the god of
matrimonial laws and the regulator of family distinctions.

Hymen, O Hymen, to whom I owe my birth, and who, having engendered
me, employed the same seed in the same place to cast upon the outraged world
a monstrous commingling of fathers, brothers, sons; of brides, wives, and
mothers!

In contradistinction to the Ulysses of Shakespeare and his crisis of
Degree, the Oedipus myth (note that we are not referring here to the
tragedy) makes no effort to link patricide and incest to anything else,
not even to Laius’s abortive attempt at infanticide. They are presented as
separate events, so anomalous that it is impossible to think of them as part
of the tumult that rages around them, involving elements of conflicting
symmetry. The dual disasters, incest and patricide, seem to be divorced
from all context and visited on Oedipus alone either by pure chance or at
the bidding of Destiny or some other sacred force.

Patricide and incest serve the same purpose here as do twins in many
primitive religions. The crimes of Oedipus signify the abolishment of dif-
ferences, but because the nondifference is attributed to a particular indi-
vidual, it is transformed into a new distinction, signifying the monstrosity
of Oedipus’s situation. The nondifference became the responsibility, not
of society at large, but of a single individual.

Patricide and incest thus play the same role in the Oedipus myth as do
the other mythical and ritual motifs considered previously. They serve to
conceal the sacrificial crisis far more effectively than they reveal it. To be
sure, they manage to express both aspects of the crisis, both reciprocity
and forced similarities; but they do so in a way that strikes terror into the
beholder and suggests that they are the exclusive responsibility of a
particular individual. We lose sight of the fact that this same reciprocity
operates among every member of the community and signifies the
existence of a sacrificial crisis.

Another thematic device, in addition to patricide and incest, cloaks the
sacrificial crisis in parallel and inverse fashion: the motif of the plague or
epidemic.

We have already referred to various epidemics as “symbols” of the
sacrificial crisis. Even if Sophocles had in mind the famous Athenian
plague of 430 B.c., he clearly did not mean to limit his reference to one
specific microbiotic visitation. The epidemic that interrupts all the vital
functions of the city is surely not unrelated to violence and the loss of
distinctions. The oracle itself explains matters: it is the infectious presence
of a murderer that has brought on the disaster.

The play makes it clear that the infection and the onslaught of reciprocal
violence are one and the same. The process by which the three protagon-
ists are each in turn tainted with violence corresponds to the progress of
the disease, always quick to lay low those who would contain it. Without
explicitly declaring the identical nature of the two strains, the text none-
theless calls attention to their parallel qualities. Begging Oedipus and
Creon to end their quarrel, the chorus exclaims: “The sight of this dying
country fills me with anguish. Must we now add to our misery the miseries
which flow from you?”

In tragedy, and outside it as well, plague is a symbol for the sacrificial
crisis; that is, it serves the same function as patricide and incest. It seems
reasonable to ask why two different symbols are used when one would
do, and whether these two symbols really play identical roles.

We need only compare the two themes—plague and patricide/incest—
to remark how they differ and what this difference implies. Vital aspects of
the sacrificial crisis are apparent in both symbolic presentations, but they
are differently distributed. The plague motif illuminates but a single
aspect: the collective character of the disaster, its universally contagious
nature. This motif ignores violence and the nondifferential character of
the crisis. With the patricide/incest motif, on the other hand, violence and
nondifference are presented in magnified and highly concentrated form,
but limited to a single individual. Here it is the collective element that has
been ignored.

Both the patricide/incest and the plague motifs serve to disguise the
presence of the sacrificial crisis, but the disguises are not the same. When
viewed separately, each appears unrecognizable, without form. One
complements the other, however, and when they are brought together
and uniformly applied to all members of the community, the shape and
substance of the crisis becomes clear. Once again it is impossible to make
any affirmative or negative judgements about the participants. The
responsibility for the events is evenly distributed among all.

If the crisis has dropped from sight, if universal reciprocity is eliminated,
it is because of the unequal distribution of the very real parts of the crisis.
In fact, nothing has been truly abolished, nothing added, but everything
has been misplaced. The whole process of mythical formulation leads to a
transferral of violent undifferentiation from all the Thebans to the person
of Oedipus. Oedipus becomes the repository of all the community’s ills.

In the myth, the fearful transgression of a single individual is substituted
for the universal onslaught of reciprocal violence. Oedipus is responsible
for the ills that have befallen his people. He has become a prime example
of the human scapegoat.

At the conclusion of his drama Sophocles has Oedipus address the
Thebans in the terms best calculated to quell their doubts and fears. He
assures them that all the evils abroad in the community are the sole
responsibility of the surrogate victim, and that he alone, as that victim,
must assume the consequences for these ills: “Believe me, you have
nothing more to fear. My ills are mine alone, no other mortal is fit to bear
them.” Oedipus is indeed the responsible party, so responsible that he
frees the community from all accountability. The concept of the plague is
a result of this situation. The plague is what remains of the sacrificial crisis
when it has been emptied of all violence. It calls to mind the passivity of
the “patient” in the modern world of medicine. Everyone is sick. Nobody
owes anybody anything by way of recompense or atonement—except, of
course, Oedipus.

If the community is to be freed of all responsibility for its unhappy
condition and the sacrificial crisis converted into a physical disorder, a
plague, the crisis must first be stripped of its violence. Or rather, this
violence must be deflected to some individual—in this case, Oedipus. In
the course of the tragic debate all the characters do their utmost to assist
in this process. As we have seen, the inquest on Laius’s death is in fact an
investigation into the general subject of the sacrificial crisis; and it is
clearly a matter of pinning the responsibility for the troubled state of the
community on some individual, of framing a reply to the mythical ques-
tion par excellence: “Who initiated the crisis?” Oedipus fails to fix the
blame on Creon or Tiresias. Creon and Tiresias are successful in their
efforts to fix the blame on him. The entire investigation is a feverish hunt
for a scapegoat, which finally turns against the very man who first loosed
the hounds.

Having oscillated freely among the three protagonists, the full burden of
guilt finally settles on one. It might very well have settled on another, or
on none. What is the mysterious mechanism that determines how the
guilt shall fall?

The attribution of guilt that henceforth passes for “true” differs in no
way from those attributions that will henceforth be regarded as “false,”
except that in the case of the “true” guilt no voice is raised to protest any
aspect of the charge. A particular version of events succeeds in imposing
itself; it loses its polemical nature in becoming the acknowledged basis of
the myth, in becoming the myth itself. The mythical attribution can only
be defined as a phenomenon of unanimity. At the point where two, three,
or hundreds of symmetrical and inverted accusations meet, one alone
makes itself heard and the others fall silent. The old pattern of each
against another gives way to the unified antagonism of all against one.

How does it happen that the community’s sense of unity, destroyed by
the sacrificial crisis, is suddenly, almost miraculously, restored? Here we
are in the very midst of the crisis, when all the circumstances seem to
militate against any unified course of action. It is impossible to find two
men who agree on anything, and each member of the community seems
intent on transferring the collective burden of responsibility to the shoul-
ders of his enemy brother. Chaos reigns. No connecting thread, however
tenuous, links the conflicts, antagonisms, and obsessions that beset each
individual.

Yet at this very moment, when all seems lost, when the irrational
runs amok amid an infinite diversity of opinions, the resolution of
the dilemma is at hand. The whole community now hurls itself into the
violent unanimity that is destined to liberate it.

What is the source of this mysterious unanimity? The antagonists
caught up in the sacrificial crisis invariably believe themselves separated
by insurmountable differences. In reality, however, these differences
gradually wear away. Everywhere we now encounter the same desire, the
same antagonism, the same strategies—the same illusion of rigid differen-
tiation within a pattern of ever-expanding uniformity. As the crisis grows
more acute, the community members are transformed into “twins,”
matching images of violence. I would be tempted to say that they are each
doubles of the other.

In Romantic literature, in the animistic theory of primitive religious
practices and in modern psychiatry, the term double is perceived as essen-
tially unreal, a projection of the imagination. I mean something different
here. Although doubles, in my use of the term, convey certain hallucin-
atory associations (which I shall discuss further on), they are in them-
selves not at all imaginary—no more than the tragic symmetry of which
they form the ideal expression is imaginary.

If violence is a great leveler of men and everybody becomes the
double, or “twin,” of his antagonist, it seems to follow that all the
doubles are identical and that any one can at any given moment become
the double of all the others; that is, the sole object of universal obsession
and hatred. A single victim can be substituted for all the potential vic-
tims, for all the enemy brothers that each member is striving to banish
from the community; he can be substituted, in fact, for each and every
member of the community. Each member’s hostility, caused by clashing
against others, becomes converted from an individual feeling to a com-
munal force unanimously directed against a single individual. The
slightest hint, the most groundless accusation, can circulate with ver-
tiginous speed and is transformed into irrefutable proof. The corporate
sense of conviction snowballs, each member taking confidence from his
neighbor by a rapid process of mimesis. The firm conviction of the group
is based on no other evidence than the unshakable unanimity of its own
illogic.

The universal spread of “doubles,” the complete effacement of
differences, heightening antagonisms but also making them interchange-
able, is the prerequisite for the establishment of violent unanimity. For
order to be reborn, disorder must first triumph; for myths to achieve their
complete integration, they must first suffer total disintegration.

Where only shortly before a thousand individual conflicts had raged
unchecked between a thousand enemy brothers, there now reappears a
true community, united in its hatred for one alone of its number. All
the rancors scattered at random among the divergent individuals, all the
differing antagonisms, now converge on an isolated and unique figure,
the surrogate victim.

The general direction of the present hypothesis should now be
abundantly clear; any community that has fallen prey to violence or has
been stricken by some overwhelming catastrophe hurls itself blindly into
the search for a scapegoat. Its members instinctively seek an immediate
and violent cure for the onslaught of unbearable violence and strive
desperately to convince themselves that all their ills are the fault of a lone
individual who can be easily disposed of.

Such circumstances bring to mind the forms of violence that break out
spontaneously in countries convulsed by crisis: lynchings, pogroms, etc. It
is perhaps worth noting that these forms of collective violence generally
justify themselves by making accusations of an Oedipal variety: parricide,
incest, infanticide.

Such comparisons are of only limited value, but they shed some light.
They reveal a hidden connection among certain tragedies that at first
glance seem utterly foreign to one another. It is impossible to say whether
Sophocles was aware of the full implications of his theme, though to judge
from the passages we have cited from Oedipus the King, it is difficult to
believe that he shared our ignorance. It could well be that the tragic
inspiration was neither more nor less than the sudden inkling of the
origins of certain mythological themes. This view seem to find support in
other tragedies besides Oedipus and other tragedians besides Sophocles—
in particular in the work of Euripides.

The heroine of Andromache is Neoptolemus’s mistress; Hermione is his
wife. The two women, prime examples of enemy sisters, engage in a tragic
debate. The humiliated wife accuses her rival of the “typical” crimes of
parricide and incest, those with which Tiresias charged Oedipus at the
same crucial moment of another tragedy:

Have you, woman, no shame at all? You do not scruple to sleep with the son of
your husband’s murderer [Neoptolemus’s father Achilles had killed Hector] or
to bear his children. Such is the way of barbarians: the father sleeps with the
daughter, the son with the mother, the brother with the sister. And they think
nothing of killing one another, nor does their law condemn the practice. We
want no such customs here.

The “substitution” is clear. The foreigner, Andromache, is made to appear
the incarnation of the sacrificial crisis that threatens the community. She
is declared capable of committing precisely those crimes that figure so
predominantly in mythology and that consequently form the subject of
classical tragedy. Hermione’s ominous final phrase, “We want no such
customs here,” already hints at the collective fury and fear that might be
launched against Andromache at Hermione’s instigation. Already the
mechanism has been put in motion for the selection of a surrogate victim.

It is difficult to believe that Euripides did not know what he was doing
when he framed these passages, that he was unaware of the close rela-
tionship between the genesis of mythology and the collective mechanism
he alludes to here; nor can I believe that he was not attempting to issue a
warning to his public, to instill a sense of uneasiness without defining the
problem precisely or confronting it directly.

We like to believe that we are well acquainted with the mechanisms of
collective violence. In fact we know them only in their most degenerate
forms, as poor imitations of the collective machinery that processed such
mythological material as the story of Oedipus. In the following pages
violent unanimity will, I believe, reveal itself as the fundamental phenom-
enon of primitive religion; although wherever it plays a crucial role it is
completely, or almost completely, absorbed by the mythological forms it
engenders. We perceive only its marginal and bastardized manifestations,
which are unproductive as far as myths and ritual are concerned.

It is generally assumed that collective violence—in particular, the
pitting of all against one—is an aberration in the history of a society; a
perversion more or less pathological in nature, whose study can hardly be
expected to yield anything of sociological significance. Our rationalist bent
(about which I will have more to say further on) leads to an innocence of
outlook that refuses to concede to collective violence anything more than
a limited and fleeting influence, a “cathartic” action similar, in its most
extreme forms, to the catharsis of the sacrificial ritual. However, the fact
that the Oedipus myth has survived over several millenia and that
modem culture continues to hold it dear would suggest that the effects of
collective violence are greatly under-estimated.

The mechanism of reciprocal violence can be described as a vicious
circle. Once a community enters the circle, it is unable to extricate itself.
We can define this circle in terms of vengeance and reprisals, and we can
offer diverse psychological descriptions of these reactions. As long as a
working capital of accumulated hatred and suspicion exists at the center
of the community, it will continue to increase no matter what men do.
Each person prepares himself for the probable aggression of his neighbors
and interprets his neighbor’s preparations as confirmation of the latter’s
aggressiveness. In more general terms, the mimetic character of violence
is so intense that once violence is installed in a community, it cannot bum
itself out.

To escape from the circle it is first necessary to remove from the scene all
those forms of violence that tend to become self-propagating and to
spawn new, imitative forms.

When a community succeeds in convincing itself that one alone of its
number is responsible for the violent mimesis besetting it; when it is able
to view this member as the single “polluted” enemy who is contaminating
the rest; and when the citizens are truly unanimous in this conviction—
then the belief becomes a reality, for there will no longer exist elsewhere
in the community a form of violence to be followed or opposed, which is
to say, imitated and propagated. In destroying the surrogate victim, men
believe that they are ridding themselves of some present ill. And indeed
they are, for they are effectively doing away with those forms of violence
that beguile the imagination and provoke emulation.

It may seem absurd to assign any practical purpose to the concept of the
surrogate victim. Yet we have only to substitute the word violence, as it is
used in these pages, for the particular ills or sins that the victim is supposed
to take upon himself to realize that we are indeed dealing, not simply with
an illusion and a mystification, but with the most formidable and influen-
tial illusion and mystification in the whole range of human experience,
one whose consequences are real and manifold.

Because modern man clings to the belief that knowledge is in itself
a “good thing,” he grants little or no importance to a procedure, such as
the one involving the surrogate victim, that only serves to conceal the
existence of man’s violent impulses. The optimistic falsification could well
constitute the worst sort of ignorance. Indeed, the formidable effective-
ness of the process derives from its depriving men of knowledge: know-
ledge of the violence inherent in themselves with which they have never
come to terms.

As Oedipus and Tiresias show us, the knowledge of these violent
impulses continues to expand in the course of the sacrificial crisis. How-
ever, far from restoring peace, the knowledge only increases the antago-
nists’ awareness of the other's violence, thereby serving to intensify the
controversy. This baleful knowledge, this lucidity that is only another
manifestation of violence, is succeeded by an all-inclusive ignorance. At a
single blow, collective violence wipes out all memory of the past. Now we
see why the sacrificial crisis is never described in myths and ritual as it
really is. There human violence is envisioned as issuing from some force
exterior to man. It is one with religion, as well as with those forces that
really do emanate from without human will: death, illness, natural
phenomena.

Men cannot confront the naked truth of their own violence without the
risk of abandoning themselves to it entirely. They have never had a very
clear idea of this violence, and it is possible that the survival of all human
societies of the past was dependent on this fundamental lack of
understanding.

The Oedipus myth, as we have attempted to explain it in the preceding
pages, follows a structural pattern that conforms to that of the surrogate
victim. Let us now try to determine whether the pattern recurs in other
myths. From what we have seen, it seems likely that the process of finding
a surrogate victim constitutes a major means, perhaps the sole means, by
which men expell from their consciousness the truth about their violent
nature—that knowledge of past violence which, if not shifted to a single
“guilty” figure, would poison both the present and the future.

The Thebans—religious believers—sought a cure for their ills in a for-
mal acceptance of the myth, in making it the indisputable version of the
events that had recently convulsed the city and in making it the charter
for a new cultural order—by convincing themselves, in short, that all their
miseries were due exclusively to the plague. Such an attitude requires
absolute faith in the guilt of the surrogate victim. And the very first
results, the sudden restoration of peace, seemed to confirm the identifica-
tion of the guilty party and also the general correctness of the diagnosis.
The crisis is seen as a mysterious illness introduced into the community by
an outsider. The cure lies in ridding the community of the sole malignant
element.

The curative process is not an illusion, and if we give our attention to
the matter we see that no attempt has been made to conceal that process.
In fact, it is constantly mentioned, but in a language and with a thematic
content of its own derivation. Naturally, this process manages to
encompass the oracular pronouncement reported by Creon: the cure
must depend on the identification and expulsion of the individual whose
presence pollutes the community. In other terms, everybody must agree
on the selection of the guilty individual. The surrogate victim plays the
same role on the collective level as the objects the shamans claim to
extract from their patients play on the individual level—objects that are
then identified as the cause of the illness.

Later on (in Chapter 9) we shall see that the same forces are at work
in both cases; but though similar, the two facets of the metaphor are not
equivalent. The mechanism of violent unanimity is not modeled on the
technique of the shamans, nor is it basically metaphorical in nature; on
the other hand, there is reason to believe that the technique of the
shamans is modeled on the mechanism of unanimity, interpreted in
mythical fashion. Parricide and incest provide the community with
exactly what it needs to represent and exorcise the effects of the
sacrificial crisis. The myth is there to prove that we are dealing with a
spontaneous process of collective self-mystification, the nature of which
escapes not only its direct but also its indirect beneficiaries—the
Freudian psychoanalyst, for instance. As far as can be ascertained the
operation does not make use of vulgar dissimulation or willful manipula-
tion of the facts concerning the sacrificial crisis. Because the violence is
unanimously ordained, it effectively restores peace and order. And the
false premises that it maintains acquire, in consequence, an impregnable
authority. These premises serve to hide from sight the unanimous reso-
lution as well as the sacrificial crisis. The resolution serves as the
framework of the myth, invisible as long as the structure remains intact.
There would be no themes without the structural support of the anath-
ema. The anathema’s true object is not Oedipus, who is only one
thematic element among others, but the unanimous quality of his selec-
tion which, if it is to remain effective, must be shielded from scrutiny,
protected from any outside contact or intervention. This anathema
still operates today in the form of neglect, through our total indifference
to the concept of collective violence and our refusal to attach any
significance to the phenomenon, even when it thrusts itself upon our
attention.

The structure of the myth remains unshaken even today. Transferring it
intact into the realm of the imaginary only serves to strengthen it, to
render it even less susceptible to analysis. No interpretation has pene-
trated to the core of the myth. Even Freud’s famous explanation of the
Oedipus story, the most brilliant and misleading of many, failed to estab-
lish the true identity of the object being “suppressed”: not the desire for
patricide or incest but the violence that lurked behind these all-too-visible
motifs, the menace of total destruction that was diverted and concealed by
means of the surrogate victim.

My hypothesis does not require that the mythological text offer a
thematic treatment of condemnation or expulsion directly related to the
underlying source of violence. Quite the contrary. The absence of this
theme in certain versions of the myth by no means invalidates my theory.
All traces of collective violence can, and may, be eliminated. This does not
mean that the effects of the violence have been spent; in fact, they are
stronger than ever. In order for the anathema to deploy its full force, it
must slip from sight and from conscious memory.

It is not the absence of the anathema from tragedy, but rather its
presence, that would pose a problem were it not for our belief that the
tragic muse effects a partial demolition of the myth. The traces of religious
anathema unearthed in tragedy should be regarded not as anachronistic
survivals from a primitive past but as being in the nature of an archaeo-
logical find. The anathema of Oedipus the King should be viewed as part of
Sophocles’ reading of the myth, a reading perhaps more radical in its
implications than we originally imagined. The poet puts some very reveal-
ing words in Oedipus’s mouth: “Quickly, in the name of the gods! hide me
somewhere far away from here. Kill me, or hurl me into the sea, where I
will never be seen again.”

The extent of the poet’s understanding of the myth and its origins
is hard to ascertain, but it does not have to be complete for tragedy to
represent a progress in the direction of mythical dismantling. The mech-
anism that produces the surrogate victim is dependent on no one particu-
lar theme because it has engendered them all; it cannot be comprehended
by means ofa purely thematic or structural interpretation of the play.

Until now we have seen Oedipus only in terms of his polluted presence, as
a receptacle for universal shame. And prior to the onslaught of collective
violence, the hero of Oedipus the King is just that. Another Oedipus
emerges, however, from the final operation; a “definitive” Oedipus, first
glimpsed in the final tragedy of the Oedipus cycle, Oedipus at Colonus.

In the opening episodes we are still dealing with the original, polluted
figure, whose appearance within their boundaries fills the inhabitants of
Colonus with dread. As the play progresses, however, a remarkable
change takes place. Oedipus is still a dangerous, even a terrifying figure,
but he has also become very precious to the community. Colonus and
Thebes begin to squabble over the future possession of the patricide’s
corpse, which is already looked upon as a valuable relic.

What has brought about this change? Initially, Oedipus was associated
with the evil aspects of the crisis. He possessed no positive qualities. If
his exile was a “good” thing, it was so in a purely negative sense, as
the amputation of a gangrenous limb is “good” for an afflicted body. In
Oedipus at Colonus, however, the scope of the drama has been enlarged.
Having plunged the community into strife, the surrogate victim restores
peace and order by his departure. Whereas all the previous acts of violence
compounded the violence directed against the surrogate victim banished
all trace of violence. The explanation for this extraordinary difference falls
naturally within the domain of religion, whose concern with the problem
is far from idle, since its solution touches on the well-being, if not the
survival, of the community. Because human thought has never succeeded
in grasping the mechanism of violent unanimity, it naturally turns toward
the victim and seeks to determine whether he is not somehow responsible
for the miraculous consequences of his own death or exile. Attention is
drawn not only to the distinctive traits of the decisive act—the form of the
murder, for example—but also to the victim’s personality. Because the
violence directed against the victim was intended to restore order and
tranquillity, it seems only logical to attribute the happy result to the victim
himself.

At the supreme moment of the crisis, the very instant when reciprocal
violence is abruptly transformed into unanimous violence, the two faces
of violence seem to be juxtaposed; the extremes meet. The surrogate
victim serves as catalyst in this metamorphosis. And in performing this
function he seems to combine in his person the most pernicious and most
beneficial aspect of violence. He becomes the incarnation, as it were, of a
game men feign to ignore, one whose basic rules are indeed unknown to
them: the game of their own violence.’

It is not enough to say that the surrogate victim “symbolizes” the
change from reciprocal violence and destruction to unanimous accord and
construction; after all, the victim is directly responsible for this change and
is an integral part of the process. From the purely religious point of view,
the surrogate victim—or, more simply, the final victim—inevitably
appears as a being who submits to violence without provoking a reprisal; a
supernatural being who sows violence to reap peace; a mysterious savior
who visits affliction on mankind in order subsequently to restore it to
good health.

To our modern way of thinking a hero cannot be “good” without ceas-
ing to be “evil,” and vice versa. Religious empiricism sees matters in a
different light; in a sense, it confines itself to recording events as it sees
them. Oedipus is initially an evil force and subsequently a beneficial one.
It is not a question of “exonerating” him, because the question of blaming
him, in the modern moralistic sense of the term, never arises. Nor for that
matter does religious empiricism show any interest in initiating one of
those programs of “rehabilitation” so fashionable today among thinkers
who claim to have freed themselves from the shackles of morality. The
claims of religious thought are too modest, too tempered by fear, for its
proponents to assume such lofty attitudes. The mysterious union of the
most evil and most beneficial forces is of vital concern to the community,
and can neither be challenged nor ignored. Nevertheless, it is a paradox
that totally escapes human comprehension; and religion humbly acknow-
ledges its impotence. The beneficial Oedipus at Colonus supercedes the
earlier, evil Oedipus, but he does not negate him. How could he negate
him, since it was the expulsion of a guilty Oedipus that prompted the
departure of violence? The peaceful outcome of his expulsion confirms
the justice of the sentence passed on him, his unanimous conviction for
patricide and incest. If Oedipus is indeed the savior of the community, it is
because he is a patricidal and incestuous son.

Sophocles’ two Oedipus tragedies show a pattern of transgression and
salvation long familiar to scholars. Such a pattern is to be found in
innumerable tales from folklore and mythology; in fairy stories, legends,
and even in works of literature. A source of violence and disorder during
his sojourn among men, the hero appears as a redeemer as soon as he has
been eliminated, invariably by violent means.

It also happens that the hero, while remaining a transgressor, is cast
primarily as a destroyer of monsters. Oedipus appears in this role in the
episode of the Sphinx. The Sphinx plays a role similar to that of the
plague, terrorizing all Thebes and demanding a periodic tribute of victims.

We must now inquire whether the explanation I have proposed for the
principal episode of the Oedipus myth is equally applicable to similar
mythological tales; in other words, whether we are in each instance deal-
ing with a different manifestation of the surrogate victim. Indeed, in all
such myths the hero draws to himself a violent reaction, whose effects
are felt throughout the community. He unwittingly conjures up a baleful,
infectious force that his own death—or triumph—transforms into a
guarantee of order and tranquillity.

The plague motif is only one of many that could serve equally well to
conceal the presence of the sacrificial crisis and its violent outcome. For
example, there are stories of collective salvation, in which the death of a
single victim serves to appease the anger of some god or spirit. A lone
individual, who may or may not have been guilty of some past crime, is
offered up to a ferocious monster or demon in order to appease him, and
he ends up killing that monster as he is killed by him.

The functioning of the surrogate victim explains the principal motifs of
the Oedipus myth and illuminates the genesis and structure of these
motifs. Moreover, I believe that this same process serves to explain a great
many other myths; so many, in fact, that we cannot help wondering
whether it might not be the structural mold of all mythology. Nor do my
speculations stop here. If the generating spark of religion itself and the
transcendental force that characterizes it are in fact the product of violent
unanimity—of social unity forged or reforged by the “expulsion” of the
surrogate victim—then even more momentous matters are at issue. If this
is indeed the case we will find ourselves dealing not only with myths but
also with rituals and the whole question of religion.

At present I have done little more than outline a hypothesis, some of
whose elements are still lacking. In the chapters to come I hope to fill out
this theory, to make clear what must now of necessity seem somewhat
obscure. The first task, however, is to examine the basis of my hypothesis
and attempt to situate it in the context of contemporary thought.

Even at this stage it is apparent, I believe, that the hypothesis casts light
on certain passages in mythological literature. Heraclitus, who has been
called the “philosopher of tragedy” and who has equal claim to the title
“philosopher of myth,” seems to have been on the track of the same
structuring force I am now pursuing. Perhaps I anticipate, but I cannot
refrain from mentioning that certain fragments of Heraclitus, until now
mute and indecipherable, suddenly assume an obvious meaning in the
light of my hypothesis. Does not Fragment 60 display a clear summation


of the origins of myth, of the role of violence in the engendering of the
gods and of distinctions? Does it not offer a resumé of all the questions
that have been addressed in this chapter?

1

Strife is the father and king of all. Some it makes gods, others men; some
slaves, and others free.

Notes

In an essay entitled “Ambiguité et renversement: sur la structure énigmatique
a Oedipe Roi,” Jean-Pierre Vernant has aptly defined this loss of cultural differ-
ence. Patricide and incest, he writes, “constitute ...a direct violation of the
game of draughts in which each piece stands, in relation to the others, at a
specified place on the draught board of the city.” In effect, the results of the
two crimes are always expressed in terms of lost distinctions: “The equaliza-
tion of Oedipus and his sons is expressed ina series of brutal images: the father
has sown his children in the same place where he himself was sown; Jocasta is
a wife: not wife but mother, whose furrows have yielded a double harvest of
father and children; she has been sown, and from these same furrows, these
‘equal’ furrows, he has obtained his children. But it is left to Tiresias to endow
this talk of equality with its true tragic weight when he addressed Oedipus in
the following terms: Evils will befall you which ‘will establish an equality
between yourself and your children’ ” (in Echanges et communications, ed. Jean
Pouillon and Pierre Maranda [The Hague, 1970], p. 425).

We will see further on that this phenomenon of the transformation of secular
into sacred elements is facilitated by hallucinatory effects that are basic to the
primordial religious experience. However, it is not essential to have experi-
enced these effects to grasp the main principles of primitive religious systems.
The logic of such systems is now open to view.


The Origins of Myth and Ritual


In the study of primitive religion two theories have long held sway. The
older attributes the origins of ritual to myth, seeking in the mythological
construct either some real event grounded in historical fact or a specific
belief that gave birth to ritualistic practices. The more recent theory
reverses the procedure, attributing to ritual not only the origin of myth
but also the origin of the gods, and—in Greece—of tragedy and other
cultural forms as well. Hubert and Mauss belong to the latter school of
thought. In sacrifice they see the genesis of the gods: “The repetition of
these ceremonies in which, either by custom or for any other reason, an
identical victim reappears at regular intervals, ends by creating a sort of
personality. The accumulation of past sacrifices thus culminates in the
creation of a god, while the individual rite preserves its secondary effects.'

Sacrifice is here visualized as engendering religion. This means, of
course, that we cannot expect to learn anything about the origin of sacri-
fice itself from Hubert and Mauss; for when a phenomenon is used to
explain other phenomena, it can generally be assumed that no explan-
ation of the explanatory phenomenon will be forthcoming. The latter
becomes a kind of unformulated dogma to be accepted on pure faith.
Whatever makes other things clear does not need, apparently, to be made
clear itself.

Hubert and Mauss have nothing to say about the origins of sacrificial
practice and very little about its nature and function, even though their
discussion is entitled Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function. As we have already
seen, the notion that sacrifice serves primarily to bring us into contact
with the “gods” makes little sense. For even if the gods are imaged forth at
the conclusion of a long series of sacrifices, what are we to make of the
preliminary rounds? What were the sacrificers thinking about at a time
when they did not yet possess gods with whom to “communicate”?
Why—for whom—were those rites performed under the vast celestial
void? The passion that prompts modern antitheists to shift all blame onto
the “gods” must not lead us astray. Sacrifice deals with humankind, and it
isin human terms that we must attempt to comprehend it.

Hubert and Mauss’s failure to come to grips with the origin and func-
tion of sacrifice makes their accurate description of its operation even
more remarkable. One cannot attribute this accuracy to some a priori
concept, for sacrifice still awaits its proper interpretation.

The resemblances among the rites practiced in disparate cultures are
striking, and the variations from one culture to another are never suffi-
cient to disguise the basic similarities. Hubert and Mauss can thus feel
justified in describing the sacrificial process outside the context of any
specific culture, as if it were some kind of technique. And a technique it
truly is; but does this technique, as these two authors contend, have no
real object and serve no function in the social process? How can an institu-
tion that is ultimately judged fantastical and imaginary manifest such
remarkable similarities from culture to culture? It is no longer a question
of appealing to “diffusionist” theories—they had already been discredited,
and with good reason, at the time Hubert and Mauss were writing.

The more one reflects on these structural similarities, the more one is
tempted to qualify them as not merely surprising, but downright miracu-
lous. And while admiring the descriptive powers of Hubert and Mauss,
one cannot help wishing they shared that irrepressible inquisitiveness
that characterized some of their predecessors. Yet it was undoubtedly
necessary to set aside a great many problems in order to schematize
certain forms of analysis—and that is precisely what these two authors
did. Undoubtedly a provisional limiting of the field of study serves to
bring into relief certain areas that had previously been neglected and
misunderstood.

In scientific research, as in warfare, it is always prudent—for the sake of
morale—to represent strategic retreats in a positive light. All the same,
workers in the field must take care not to mistake these retreats for glori-
ous victories. In all the social sciences today the tendencies apparent in
the work of Hubert and Mauss seem to have swept the field. It is no longer
a question of relating ritual to myth or even myth to ritual. Such pro-
cedures invariably produced a circular train of argument, from which the
only means of escape seemed to lie in designating some arbitrary point of
departure. It is good that this futile mode of thought has been abandoned.
Another positive development is the recognition that if a solution to the
problem exists, it exists at the center of the circle, not on the periphery.
What is decidedly not good is the conclusion that either this center is
totally inaccessible or there is no center at all.

Such pessimistic suppositions, based on past failures, purport to be
ultrascientific but are in fact questions of philosophy and temperament.
Past failures prove nothing outside their own context. It is fool-hardy to
condemn the search for a real origin simply because the search has not
been successful so far. Antimetaphysical speculation is, after all, another
form of metaphysics. At any moment a new theory may arise that will
provide a satisfactory—that is, a scientific—answer to the question of the
origins, nature, and function not only of sacrifice but also of religion in
general.

It is not enough to declare certain problems null and void, after a curs-
ory and purely “symbolic” investigation, in order to lay claim to a scien-
tific approach. Science is not a refuge for philosophic skepticism, a pose
of sage resignation. All great discoveries begin with a sense of curiosity
that is today often dismissed as childish and a faith in the resources of
language, even the most commonplace language, that is often condemned
as naive. When the nil admirari of those bourgeois dandys caricatured by
Stendhal passes for the last word in understanding, we have just cause for
alarm. The relative failure of Frazer, Freud, or Robertson Smith is no
reason to regard their insistence on getting to the bottom of things as
foolish or outdated. To assert that there is nothing to be gained by seeking
out the function and origin of ritual is to say that the language of religion
is destined to remain forever a dead letter, a kind of gibberish—cleverly
codified perhaps, but devoid of any real meaning.

From time to time a voice is heard calling our attention to the very
strangeness of institutions such as sacrifice and attempting to satisfy our
deep need to find a firm basis in reality for these institutions. Adolphe
Jensen, for one, managed to reopen the great inquiries of the past—and it
is perhaps for that very reason that his work has received so little notice
from contemporary scholars. Jensen writes:

Man must have been subjected to some particularly overwhelming experi-
ences to have been led to introduce such cruel practices into his life. What
could have been the reasons?

What could have persuaded men to kill their fellow-beings—not in the wan-
ton, amoral manner of barbarians succumbing to their instincts, but as a reflex
of the awakened consciousness of the creator of cultural forms, seeking to
comprehend the innermost nature of the world and to transmit this knowledge
to future generations by means of dramatic representations? .. . Mythological
thought always returns to what happened initially, to the act of creation, justly
assuming that this occurrence sheds the brightest, most revealing light on a
given subject. .. . If murder plays such a decisive role in the sacrificial rite, this
means that it must have played a particularly important part in the initial
impulse.”

I do not deny the utility of recent descriptive contributions. But I
believe the time has come for us to ask ourselves, once again, whether
something of vital importance did indeed take place initially. We must
return to the traditional questions, reframing them in terms of the rigorous
methodology of our own times.

Once we have determined the underlying principle of our search, we
should consider the a priori conditions that any theory must fulfill to
command our scrutiny. If sacrifice has a real origin, the memory of which
myths keep alive in one way and rituals commemorate in another, then it
seems clear that we are dealing with an event that initially made a very
strong impression. Very strong, but not unforgettable—for in the end it is
forgotten. But this impression, although subject to later modification,
lives on in the religious observances and perhaps in all the cultural
manifestations of the society. There is no need to postulate some form of
individual or collective subconscious to account for its survival.

The extraordinary number of commemorative rites that have to do with
killing leads us to imagine that the original event must have been a mur-
der. Freud, in Totem and Taboo, lucidly perceived this necessity. And the
remarkable similarities among the sacrificial rites of various localities sug-
gest that the murder was always of the same general type. This does not
mean that the murder was a single historical event or that it belongs
exclusively to prehistory. Although the event looks exceptional from the
perspective of any given society, it seems quite commonplace in a broad,
comparative context.

The sacrificial crisis and the surrogate-victim mechanism fulfill all the
conditions required of a satisfactory hypothesis.

But, it may be protested, if such an event had actually taken place,
science would already have discovered it. This assertion fails to take into
account an extraordinary deficiency of modern science. The presence of a
religious element at the source of all human societies is indubitable; yet, of
all social institutions, religion is the only one to which science has been
unable to attribute a genuine objective, a real function. I contend that the
objective of ritual is the proper reenactment of the surrogate-victim
mechanism; its function is to perpetuate or renew the effects of this
mechanism; that is, to keep violence outside the community.

I began by remarking on the cathartic function of sacrifice, and went on
to define the sacrificial crisis as the loss of this function, as well as of all
cultural distinctions. If the unanimous violence directed against the
surrogate victim succeeds in bringing this crisis to an end, clearly this
violence must be at the origin of a new sacrificial system. If the surrogate
victim can interrupt the destructuring process, it must be at the origin of
structure. We shall see further on whether it is possible to verify this
assertion with regard to those rites and regulations that are essential to a
cultural order—festivals, rites of passage, proscriptions against incest, etc.
At present we have good reason to believe that the violence directed
against the surrogate victim might well be radically generative in that, by
putting an end to the vicious and destructive cycle of violence, it simul-
taneously initiates another and constructive cycle, that of the sacrificial
rite—which protects the community from that same violence and allows
culture to flourish.

If this is true, the generative violence constitutes at least the indirect
origin of all those things that men hold most dear and that they strive
most ardently to preserve. This notion is affirmed, though in a veiled and
transfigured manner, by the many etiological myths that deal with the
murder of one mythological character by other mythological characters.
That event is conceived as the origin of the cultural order; the dead divinity
becomes the source not only of sacred rites but also of matrimonial regula-
tions and proscriptions of every kind; in short, of all those cultural forms
that give man his unique humanity.

In some cases the mythological characters are said to grant men what-
ever they need to live in society; in other cases they deny them these same
benefits. In either case men manage to obtain what they require, some-
times by theft or trickery, but not before one of the mythological char-
acters has been isolated from the others and subjected to some unusual
accident or misfortune. This accident may be fatal; sometimes it is merely
ludicrous. We must recognize in it a mask of the collective violence that
terminates the crisis. Sometimes the central figure breaks away from the
group and flees, taking with him the object in dispute. Generally he is
overtaken and put to death; occasionally he is merely wounded or beaten.
Sometimes it is he who demands to be beaten, and at each blow extra-
ordinary benefits accrue, giving rise to a fertility and an abundance that
assures the harmonious functioning of the cultural order.

The mythical narrative sometimes takes the form of a contest or game, a
quasi-sportive or pugilistic event that evokes the rivalries inherent in the
sacrificial crisis. Behind all these themes one can detect the outline of
reciprocal violence, gradually transformed into a unanimous act. It is cer-
tainly astonishing that all human activities, and even the course of nature
itself, are subordinated to this metamorphosis of violence taking place at
the heart of the community. When relationships between men are
troubled, when men cease to cooperate among themselves and to come to
terms with one another, there isno human enterprise that does not suffer.
Even the success of the hunt, of fishing expeditions, of food gathering
is put in question. Therefore, the benefits attributed to the generative
violence extend beyond mankind to nature itself. The act of collective
murder is seen as the source of all abundance; the principle of procreation
is attributed to it, and all those plants that are useful to man; everything
beneficial and nutritive is said to take root in the body of the primordial
victim.

Even Hubert and Mauss cite facts that should serve to bring socially
aware investigators into direct contact with social realities. Side by side
with myths in which the element of generative mob action is barely dis-
cernible, there exist others in which its presence is explicitly acknow-
ledged. Such transparent myths are by no means confined to those
cultures we Western humanists might be tempted to qualify as primitive
or crude. Hubert and Mauss offer an exemplary specimen from Greece:
“At Troezen, in the peribolos of the temple of Hippolytos, the death of the
foreign goddesses Damia and Auxesia was commemorated by an annual
festival, the lithobolia. According to tradition, the two virgin goddesses
from Crete were stoned to death in the course of an uprising. These for-
eigners represent the foreigner, the passerby who often plays a role in
the harvest festivals; and the lapidation is a sacrificial rite.”*

Associated with the Oedipus myth are rites, like those involving the
pharmakos, whose true significance becomes clear in the light of the
above comments. The city of Athens prudently kept on hand a number
of unfortunate souls, whom it maintained at public expense, for ap-
pointed times as well as in certain emergencies. Whenever some calamity
threatened—plague, famine, foreign invasion, or internal dissension—
there was always a pharmakos at the disposal of the community.

The complete explanation of the Oedipus myth—that is, the determin-
ing of the precise function of the surrogate victim—permits us to under-
stand the aim of the sacrificers. They are striving to produce a replica, as
faithful as possible in every detail, of a previous crisis that was resolved by
means of a spontaneously unanimous victimization. All the dangers, real
and imaginary, that threaten the community are subsumed in the most
terrible danger that can confront a society: the sacrificial crisis. The rite
is therefore a repetition of the original, spontaneous “lynching” that
restored order in the community by reestablishing, around the figure of
the surrogate victim, that sentiment of social accord that had been des-
troyed in the onslaught of reciprocal violence. Like Oedipus, the victim is
considered a polluted object, whose living presence contaminates every-
thing that comes in contact with it and whose death purges the com-
munity of its ills—as the subsequent restoration of public tranquillity
clearly testifies. That is why the pharmakos was paraded about the city. He
was used as a kind of sponge to sop up impurities, and afterward he was
expelled from the community or killed in a ceremony that involved the
entire populace.

If my thesis is correct, the pharmakos, like Oedipus himself, has a
dual connotation. On the one hand he is a woebegone figure, an object
of scorn who is also weighed down with guilt; a butt for all sorts of
gibes, insults, and of course, outbursts of violence. On the other hand,
we find him surrounded by a quasi-religious aura of veneration; he has
become a sort of cult object. This duality reflects the metamorphosis the
ritual victim is designed to effect; the victim draws to itself all the
violence infecting the original victim and through its own death trans-
forms this baneful violence into beneficial violence, into harmony and
abundance.

It is not surprising that the word pharmakon in classical Greek means
both poison and the antidote for poison, both sickness and cure—in short,
any substance capable of perpetrating a very good or very bad action,
according to the circumstances and the dosage. The pharmakon is thus a
magic drug or volatile elixir, whose administration had best be left by
ordinary men in the hands of those who enjoy special knowledge and
exceptional powers—priests, magicians, shamans, doctors, and so on.*

The comparison of Oedipus and the pharmakos is not meant to
imply that we accept the views of certain scholars (most notably the


early-twentieth-century Cambridge Ritualists) who have proposed a
purely ritualistic interpretation of tragedy. It is evident that the Oedipus
myth is intimately associated with rites analogous to those involving the
pharmakos, but we must take care not to confuse the myth and ritual, on
the one hand, with the essentially antimythical and antiritualistic inspir-
ation of the drama on the other. The Cambridge Ritualists and their dis-
ciples have based their interpretation of the role of the pharmakos on the
idea that seasonal change—the “death” and “resurrection” of nature—
constitutes the original model for the rite, its deep-seated meaning. In
fact, there is nothing in nature that could encourage or even suggest such
an atrocious sort of ritual killing as the death of the pharmakos. In my
opinion, the sole possible model remains the sacrificial crisis and its reso-
lution. Nature enters the picture later, when the ritualistic mind succeeds
in detecting certain similarities between nature’s rhythms and the com-
munity’s alternating pattern of order and disorder. The modus operandi of
violence—sometimes reciprocal and pernicious, sometimes unanimous
and beneficial—is then taken as the model for the entire universe.

To portray tragedy as a repetition and an adaptation of the seasonal
rites, a sort of sacre du printemps, is surely to strip it of those very elements
that mark it as tragedy. This remains true even if it is correct ultimately to
confer on tragedy a quasi-ritualistic value in Western culture. Frazer and
the Cambridge Ritualists center their interpretation on seasonal and agri-
cultural connotations that do play an important role in many festivals but
that are ultimately derived, like all other connotations, from the victimiza-
tion mechanism. The connection between the drama and the major
mythological themes is undeniable, but in order to grasp its full signifi-
cance we must transcend the approach that limits itself to thematic analysis
and renounce those prejudices that might lead us to portray the “scape-
goat” purely as a product of blind superstition, a nonfunctional device
bereft of any operative value. In the scapegoat theme we should recognize
the very real metamorphosis of reciprocal violence into restraining
violence through the agency of unanimity. This unique mechanism struc-
tures all cultural values even as it conceals itself behind them; it is associ-
ated even more fundamentally with the double-edged images of myths
and rituals. Sophocles “appends” nothing to the scapegoat theme; its
“broader meaning” is not simply tacked on, nor has the tragic poet on his
own initiative turned Oedipus into a “reflection of the human condition.”
Scapegoat effects are more deeply rooted in the human condition than we
are willing to admit.”

My hypothesis is becoming at once broader and more precise. It should
permit us to see through certain previously impenetrable religious acts,
such as the execution of the pharmakos, and to discern their perfectly
intelligible aims. As we will soon discover, this same hypothesis pertains
not only to rites as a general category, but also to their most minute
details. Hitherto I have examined only those sacrifices that involve human
victims. The link between the rite and the functioning of violent unani-
mity is especially apparent when the original victim also happens to have
been a human being. In such instances, the effort at imitation is easy to
discern.

We should now ask ourselves whether animal sacrifices, too, cannot be
defined as the mimesis of an initial collective murder. In my first chapter I
suggested that there was no essential difference between human and
animal sacrifice. If this is true, the origin of all sacrifices must be the same.
The celebrated Judaic scapegoat and all animal rites of the same type lend
strong support to my hypothesis. But there is surely no harm in pausing a
moment longer to examine a “classical” case of animal sacrifice in order to
demonstrate, if possible, its direct connection with the execution of a
surrogate victim. If it can be shown that the sacrificial rites are indeed
striving to reproduce the mechanism of violent unanimity and that the
surrogate victim is indeed the key to all these rites, considerable new light
will be shed on the matter of animal sacrifice.

Let us turn our attention to one of those rare societies in which sacrifice
survives to this day as a living institution and whose customs have been
diligently recorded by a trained ethnologist. In Divinity and Experience,
Godfrey Lienhardt describes in detail several sacrificial ceremonies that he
witnessed among the Dinka. I will summarize the general substance of his
descriptions, taking care to emphasize those points that seem especially
significant.

The insistent rhythm of choral incantations gradually captures the
attention of a crowd of bystanders who at first appeared scattered and self-
absorbed. Participants begin to brandish weapons in mock warfare. A few
isolated individuals strike out at others, but without any real hostility. In
these preparatory stages violence is, therefore, already present in a ritual
form, but it is still manifestly reciprocal; the ritualistic imitation deals first
with the sacrificial crisis itself, with the chaotic antecedents to the unani-
mous resolution. From time to time somebody detaches himself from the
group to beat the cow or calf that has been tied to a nearby stake, or to
hurlinsults at it. There is nothing static or stilted about the performance; it
succeeds in giving shape to a collective impulse that gradually triumphs
over the forces of dispersion and discord by bringing corporate violence to
bear on a ritual victim. In this rite the metamorphosis of reciprocal vio-
lence into unilateral violence is explicitly and dramatically reenacted. And
it seems to me that the same can be seen to hold true for an infinite
number of rites if one keeps a sharp eye out for signs (often, admittedly,
fragmentary and elusive) that reveal the functioning of this particular
metamorphosis. In the often-cited example of the Greek Bouphonia, the
participants make a point of quarreling among themselves before turning
their attention to the designated victim. AIl the mock battles that gene-
rally take place prior to sacrificial ceremonies and all the ritual dances
whose formal symmetry is reflected in a perpetual confrontation between
the performers lend themselves to an interpretation in which the
performances are seen as imitative responses to a sacrificial crisis.

In the Dinka sacrifice it seems that the paroxysm takes place not at the
death of the victim, but in the course of the ritual curses pronounced
before its death. One gets the impression that these curses are in them-
selves able to destroy the victim; that it is, as in tragedy, for all practical
purposes killed by words. And these words, even if they are not firmly
fixed by custom, are fundamentally identical to the accusations hurled by
Tiresias against Oedipus. The actual execution sometimes consists of a
veritable stampede of the entire group directed against the victim. In this
case, it is the victim’s genitals that are singled out. The same is true of the
pharmakos who is whipped on his sexual organs with herbaceous plants.
There is thus some reason to believe that the animal victim is a stand-in
for an original victim accused, like Oedipus, of patricide, incest, or of some
other sexual transgression that signifies the violent abolition of distinc-
tions—the major cause of cultural disintegration. The means of dispatch-
ing the victim may vary depending on the nature of the crime; but the
death sentence itself remains invariable. The ritualistic mentality imagines
that this death will result in benefits too great to be ascribed to a simple
punitive measure. These benefits must be real. But the ritualistic mental-
ity does not understand why they have accrued; the only explanations it
can offer are mythic. However, this same mentality has a good notion of
how these benefits are obtained, and it tries unceasingly to repeat the
fruitful process.

The scorn, hostility, and cruelty displayed toward the animal prior to
the ritualistic slaughter are replaced upon its death by a show of ritualistic
veneration. In bearing away into death the scourge of reciprocal violence,
the victim has performed its assigned function. Henceforth the victim will
incarnate violence in both its guises, beneficial and baneful; that is, it will
personify the All-Powerful who rules from on high. Having been so fla-
grantly abused, it is only reasonable that the victim should be greatly
honored—just as it was reasonable to banish Oedipus when he seemed
the bearer of ill fortune and reasonable to honor him when his departure
assured the community’s well-being. That adopting the former attitude
assures the latter result seems to confirm the rationality of the plan, despite
its contradictory appearance.

Lienhardt himself defines the victim as a scapegoat who becomes the
receptacle of human passions. We are dealing here with an animal phar-
makos, a calf or cow that assumes, not some vague and ill-defined sins,
but the very real (though often hidden) hostilities that ail the members of
the community feel for one another. Our portrayal of sacrifice as an imitation
and reenactment of spontaneous collective violence in no way conflicts
with the definition I proposed in Chapter 1. In fact, spontaneous violence
contains an element of appeasement that can also be found in ritual sacri-
fice, though in diluted form. In the original event, it is unleashed violence
that is checked and at the same time partially appeased; in the ritual
reenactment, it is the more or less latent aggressions that are dealt with.

The community is both attracted and repelled by its own origins. It feels
the constant need to reexperience them, albeit in veiled and transfigured
form. By means of rites the community manages to cajole and somewhat
subdue the forces of destruction. But the true nature and real function of
these forces will always elude its grasp, precisely because the source of the
evil is the community itself. The only way in which the ritualistic imagin-
ation can succeed in its self-appointed task—a task both painstaking and
elusive—is by allowing violence a certain amount of free play, as in the
original instance, but not too much; that is, by exercising its memory of the
collective expulsion on carefully designated objects and within a rigorous
framework.

In societies where sacrifice is still a living institution it displays the cath-
artic function I attributed to it in my first chapter. The catharsis is per-
formed in a structural setting so strikingly similar to that of unanimous
violence that one can only conclude that it is a deliberate, if not an
entirely exact, imitation of unanimous violence.

Any thesis that maintains that ritual is the imitation and reenactment of
spontaneous, unanimous violence may well seem fanciful, even fantastic,
as long as one considers a few isolated rites. But when one widens the
scope of the inquiry, supporting evidence appears at every turn. Seen
from a broad perspective, certain mythological and ritualistic analogies,
previous overlooked, leap into view. Even a cursory examination reveals
that the theme of unanimity recurs with extraordinary frequency in all
aspects of religious life, in rituals, and in myths. It recurs in cultures so far
apart, in forms so disparate, and in texts so diverse in nature that it is
impossible to explain it away through some diffusionist theory.

As noted above, the Dinka sacrificial execution often takes the form of a
stampede of young men, who trample the beast down and crush him by
their sheer mass. When the animal is too large to be killed in this way, he
is slaughtered in a more conventional manner; but a simulated stampede
is still performed as a prelude to the slaughter. The sacrificial ceremony
requires a show of collective participation, if only in purely symbolic form.
This association of the collectivity with the killing of the sacrificial victim is
found in numerous instances—notably in the Dionysiac sparagmos, which
I will discuss later on.* All the participants, without exception, are
required to take part in the death scene. The same is true for the Arabian
camel sacrifice described in Robertson Smith’s Religion of the Semites, and
for a good many other sacrificial rituals.

It is as a unanimous group that Odysseus and his companions plunge the
red-hot stake into the Cyclops’ eye. It is as a unanimous group that the
gods of some of the generative myths conspire and bring about the death
of one of their divine colleagues. In Hindu mythology the same motif
recurs. The Yadjour-Veda speaks of a sacrificial ceremony in which a god,
Soma, is to be put to death by the other gods. Mithra at first refuses to join
his divine companions in the act, but he is finally persuaded to do so by
the argument that the sacrifice will be totally ineffective if not performed
by all. This myth offers a prescription for the correct performance of a
sacrifice. Unanimity is a formal requirement; the abstention of a single
participant renders the sacrifice even worse than useless—it makes it
dangerous.

In the story of the murder of Hainuwele, mythological heroine of the
Ceram Islanders, the sacrificers stamp on her grave in a manner that
emphatically underlines the unanimous and collective character of the
enterprise. The signs of unanimity displayed in some local myth can
reappear in identical form in a ritual peformed by some other community.
For example, the Ngadju-Dayaks of Borneo first sacrifice slaves, then per-
form a burial rite that involves all the participants’ stamping on the
graves. In fact, the Ngadju-Dayaks demand total participation in all their
sacrificial rites. The long drawn out agony of the slaves’ execution yields
nothing to psychological explanations. What counts is the communal ges-
ture of unanimity; therefore, all the participants in the sacrifice are
required to strike the victim before its death. The ritualistic structure of
the ceremony is strictly regulated and reflects the hierarchical distinctions
that govern the cultural order. Animal sacrifices are performed in the
same manner.’

Even in a society such as the Kaingang, wracked by reciprocal violence,
the demand for unanimity reappears in bastard form: “The murderers
never wanted to act alone. They insisted on the collaboration of the mem-
bers of the group. To demand that the final blow be delivered by someone
else is the usual practice at Kaingang murders.”* There is no question of
denying the psychological significance of such accounts; quite the con-
trary. In the absence of any collective structuralization, our only recourse
is the psychological interpretation. No ritual context is available; evil
violence runs wild.

The function of sacrifice, as defined in Chapter 1, not only allows for but
requires a surrogate victim—in other words, violent unanimity. In ritual
sacrifice the victim, when actually put to death, diverts violence from its
forbidden objectives within the community. But for whom, precisely, is
this victim substituted? Heretofore we could only conceive of this substi-
tution in terms of individual psychological mechanisms, which clearly do
not provide an adequate picture of the process. If there were no surrogate
victim to transform the sacrifice from an essentially private concern into
one involving the whole community, we would be obliged to regard the
victim as a substitute for particular individuals who have somehow pro-
voked the sacrificer’s anger. If the transfer is purely personal, as it is in
psychoanalysis, then sacrifice cannot be a true social institution involving
the entire community. But sacrifice, as we know, is essentially a com-
munal institution. “Individualization” marks a later, decadent stage in its
evolution, a development contrary to its original spirit.

To understand how and why sacrifice functions as it does, we should
consider the proposition that the ritual victim is never substituted for
some particular member of the community or even for the community as
a whole: it is always substituted for the surrogate victim. As this victim itself
serves as a substitute for all the members of the community, the sacrificial
substitution doesindeed play therole that we haveattributed to it, protecting
all the members of the community from their respective violence—but
always through the intermediary of the surrogate victim.

This observation should clear me of any suspicion of “psychologizing”
while eliminating a serious objection to basing the present theory on sacri-
ficial substitution. If the entire community were not already subsumed
under a single head, that of the surrogate victim, it would be impossible to
attribute to the sacrificial substitution the significance we have claimed for
it, impossible to establish a social basis for the institution.

The original act of violence is unique and spontaneous. Ritual sacrifices,
however, are multiple, endlessly repeated. All those aspects of the original
act that had escaped man’s control—the choice of time and place, the
selection of the victim—are now premeditated and fixed by custom. The
ritual process aims at removing all element of chance and seeks to extract
from the original violence some technique of cathartic appeasement. The
diluted force of the sacrificial ritual cannot be attributed to imperfections
in its imitative technique. After all, the rite is designed to function during
periods of relative calm; as we have seen, its role is not curative, but
preventive. If it were more “effective” than it in fact is—if it did not limit
itself to appropriate sacrificial victims but instead, like the original act of
violence, vented its force on a participating member of the community—
then it would lose all effectiveness, for it would bring to pass the very
thing it was supposed to prevent: a relapse into the sacrificial crisis. The
sacrificial process is as fully adapted to its normal function as collective
murder is to its abnormal and normative function. There is every reason
to believe that the minor catharsis of the sacrificial act is derived from that
major catharsis circumscribed by collective murder.

Ritual sacrifice is founded on a double substitution. The first, which
passes unperceived, is the substitution of one member of the community
for all, brought about through the operation of the surrogate victim. The
second, the only truly “ritualistic” substitution, is super-imposed on the
first. It is the substitution of a victim belonging to a predetermined sacri-
ficial category for the original victim. The surrogate victim comes from
inside the community, and the ritual victim must come from outside;
otherwise the community might find it difficult to unite against it.

How, it may be asked, does the second substitution graft itself onto the
first? How does the original violence succeed in imposing a centrifugal
force on the rite? In short, how does the sacrificial technique operate? I
will attempt to return to these questions, but at this point I wish to draw
attention to the essentially mimetic character of sacrifice with regard to
the original, generative act of violence. Thanks to this mimetic aspect we
can understand how the sacrificial process can exist and function, without
being obliged to attribute to the ritualistic mind a manipulative ability or a
clairvoyance that it most certainly does not possess.

It is entirely possible to regard the sacrificial rite as a commemoration of
areal event without reducing it to the triviality of one of our own national
holidays; or, for that matter, without ascribing it to some neurotic compul-
sion, as psychoanalysts are wont to do. A trace of very real violence
persists in the rite, and there is no doubt that the rite succeeds at least
partially because of its grim associations, its lingering fascination; but its
essential orientation is peaceful. Even the most violent rites are specifi-
cally designed to abolish violence. To see these rites as expressions of man’s
pathological morbidity is to miss the point.

It goes without saying that the rite has its violent aspects, but these
always involve a lesser violence, proffered as a bulwark against a far
more virulent violence. Moreover, the rite aims at the most profound
state of peace known to any community: the peace that follows the
sacrificial crisis and results from the unanimous accord generated by the
surrogate victim. To banish the evil emanations that accumulate within
the community and to recapture the freshness of this original experience
are one and the same task. Whether order reigns supreme or whether its
reign is already challenged, the same model, the same plan of action is
invariably proposed. It is the plan, associated with the victorious
resolution of all communal crises, that involves violence against the
surrogate victim.

We are evolving a theory of myth and ritual—in short, of religion as a
whole. Up to this point the analyses of the crucial role attributed to the
surrogate victim and to unanimous violence may have appeared too
summary, too incomplete for this theory to seem much more than a work-
ing hypothesis. At this stage of our exposition we can hardly hope to have
banished all the reader’s doubts. A thesis that attributes a real origin to
religion demands the abandonment of too many currently accepted ideas
and the rethinking of too many fundamental concepts to be readily
accepted, expecially when it is not susceptible to direct verification. If
ritual imitation no longer recalls precisely what it is imitating, if the secret
of the primordial event has been allowed to slip from its memory, then the
rite involves a form of delusion that has never subsequently been
understood.


No single rite will reproduce, point for point, the operations my
hypothesis proposes as the origin of all rites. A delusion concerning its
own factual basis—not the absence of that basis—is characteristic of
religion. And the source of this delusion is none other than the surrogate
victim; or rather, the fact, which remains unperceived, that the surrogate
victim is arbitrarily chosen. The ritualistic mind strives to reproduce the
operation of violent unanimity without understanding its mimetic nature.
Ifmy hypothesis is correct, no single religious form will suffice to illuminate
the whole picture, but a multiplicity of examples will cast light on its
various aspects until everything gradually becomes clear and certainty
prevails.

In order to verify my hypothesis, then, it must be applied to many
different forms of ritual and myth, as far apart in content, history, and
geography as possible. If it is correct, the complex rites will provide the
most striking confirmation. The more complex a system, the more
numerous will be the elements it strives to reproduce in the operation
analyzed above. As most of these elements are, in principle, already in our
possession, the most difficult problems should resolve themselves of their
own accord. The scattered fragments of the system should cohere, and the
unintelligible become intelligible.

The sacred monarchies of continental Africa have long resisted all
attempts at analysis. In discussing the complexity of their structures,
scholars have had recourse to such adjectives as “strange” and “aberrant.”
In an era when it was still believed possible to classify all rituals under
more or less logical headings, the African rites were generally grouped
under the rubric “Exceptions.”

In one important group, situated between Egypt and Swaziland, the
king is required to commit an act of incest, either real or symbolic, on
certain solemn occasions—notably, at his enthronement or in the course
of the periodic rites of renewal. Among the king’s possible partners are
virtually all the women formally forbidden him by matrimonial regula-
tions: mother, sisters, daughters, nieces, cousins, etc. Sometimes the par-
entage is real, sometimes classificatory. In societies where the incestuous
act is no longer actually consummated—if, indeed, it ever was—a symbol-
ism of incest persists. As Luc de Heusch has pointed out, the important
role played by the queen mother in these societies can only be understood
in the context of ritual incest.’

In order to understand royal incest we must take care not to wrench
it from its context, as is too often done by writers captivated by its
sensational aspects. This rite forms part of an overall ritualistic procedure
that prescribes the other transgressions the king must commit before he
takes office. For example, he must eat certain forbidden foods, and
commit certain acts of violence. In some instances, he is literally bathed in
blood and fed concoctions whose ingredients (bloody offal and refuse of
all kinds) indicate their evil character. In some societies the whole
enthronement ceremony takes place in an atmosphere of blood-stained
confusion. It is not a question, then, of one particular forbidden act or of
one act being particularly forbidden. On occasion the king is required to
commit all the forbidden acts that are imaginable and possible for him to
commit. The encyclopedic character of the transgressions, as well as the
eclectic nature of the incestuous act, betray who it is that the king is
supposed to incarnate: the paragon of transgressors, the man who holds
nothing sacred and who fearlessly assumes every form of hubris.

We are not dealing here with royal peccadilloes in the class, let us say, of
Louis XIV’s mistresses—objects of amused forebearance, perhaps, but
accorded no official position by the community. The African peoples close
their eyes to nothing; in fact, they keep them wide open, and incest, in
their judgment, often constitutes the sine qua non of accession to the
throne. That is not to say that such infractions are no longer considered
reprehensible when committed by a king. On the contrary, it is because of
their ability to remain reprehensible that these infractions are selected.
These acts bestow on the king a particularly potent form of pollution,
which is repeatedly alluded to in the symbolic imagery of the ceremonies:
“Among the Bushongs, for example, where rats are regarded as nyec (dis-
gusting) and held as taboo, the king is formally presented at his coron-
ation with a basket full of these rodents.”!° The theme of the leper-king is
sometimes associated with this same ceremony; the new king is pro-
claimed the descendant and heir of a royal leper who was the first to
occupy the throne.!!

The cultures that practice royal incest sometimes offer an interpretation
of it that cannot be taken seriously. It is asserted that the king chooses a
wife from among his close relatives in order to preserve the purity of the
royal blood. This explanation will not do. Clearly the incest, as well as the
other “forbidden” acts, are designed to make the king the very incarnation
of impurity. It is because of this impurity that the king, in the course of the
enthronement and renewal ceremonies, is subjected to the ritualistic
insults and abuse of his people. A hostile crowd denounces the mis-
conduct of this miscreant, who is as yet nothing more than a criminal and
a social outcast. In some instances the royal army stages a mock attack on
the king’s personal bodyguard and even on the king himself.

If one chooses to make a criminal of one’s king and requires him to
violate the most sacred laws, in particular the laws of exogamy, it cannot
be for the pleasure of “pardoning” him or of displaying one’s generosity of
spirit. On the contrary: all this takes place because punishment of the
severest sort seems to be in order, and the needful insults and hostilities
find their outlet in sacrificial ceremonies in which the king plays the chief
role—the role of the original victim. I have insisted on the need to view
royal incest in its proper ritual context. This context is not limited to the
act itself; it appears also to include the real or symbolic sacrifice of the
monarch. And the sacrifice of the king is clearly a punishment for his
transgressions. The idea that the king is sacrificed because he has lost his
strength or virility is as fanciful as the theory that royal incest preserves
the purity of the family strain. Both theories are tardy afterthoughts,
designed to supply an ideological basis for the rites. Few ethnologists take
them seriously, and ethnological evidence offers good reason to doubt
them. In Rwanda, for example, the king and the queen mother—clearly
an incestuous couple—must periodically submit to a sacrificial rite that
can only be regarded as a symbolic punishment for incest: “The royal pair
appeared in public, bound like captives condemned to death. A bull and a
cow, their substitutes, were clubbed to the ground and slaughtered. The
king then mounted the flanks of the bull and some of the bull’s blood was
poured over him so as to carry the symbolic resemblance between the two as far
as possible.”

It should now be clear what scenario the king is acting out and what
place incest occupies in the plot. This scenario is very like the Oedipus
myth—not by reason of historical affiliation, but because the mythic and
ritualistic imaginations are using the same model in both cases. Behind
the pageantry of the African monarchies lurks the specter of the sacrificial
crisis, suddenly resolved by the unanimity arising from the generative act
of violence. Each African king is a new Oedipus, obliged to play out his
own myth from beginning to end, because ritualistic theory sees in this
enactment the means of renewing and perpetuating a cultural order that
is constantly on the brink of destruction. As in the case of Oedipus, there
was a charge of incest associated with the original act of mob violence and
serving as its justification, an accusation seemingly confirmed by the
effective results of the collective action. The king is thus required to do
what he was originally accused of and to do it not to public acclaim, but to the
angry protests that accompanied the original accusation. In principle the
charge of incest will at each successive enthronement give rise to the same
indignation, the same collective violence that on the original occasion
accompanied the slaughter that allayed the universal rage and led to the
triumphant advent of the cultural order.

The relationship between royal incest and a prior accusation of incest is
often confirmed by an etiological myth. H. J. Krige and J. D. Krige report
such a myth among the Lovedu."? Incest presides over the birth of society;
it is the bearer of peace and abundance to mankind. But incest is neither a
first cause nor an essential condition. Although it may initially appear to
offer justification for the act of sacrifice, on a deeper level it is the act of
sacrifice that justifies the incest. The king reigns only by virtue of his
future death; he is no more and no less than a victim awaiting sacrifice, a
condemned man about to be executed. The sacrifice itself is not the first,
but a ritualized form of the original outburst of violent unanimity.

Although the king is required to eat disgusting concoctions and commit
all sorts of violent crimes, there is no reason to associate his performance
with the avant-garde theater or to see him as a sort of antihero of the
contemporary counterculture. The spirit behind these rites has nothing in
common with such modern phenomena. Rather than welcome the
powers of evil with open arms, the rites seek to exorcise them. The king
must show himself “worthy” of his punishment—fully as worthy as the
original outcast from whom the ceremony derives. It is important to culti-
vate the future victim’s supposed potential for evil, to transform him into
a monster of iniquity—not for esthetic reasons, but to enable him to pola-
rize, to literally draw to himself, all the infectious strains in the community
and transform them into sources of peace and fecundity. The principle of
this metamorphosis has its source in the sacrifice of the monarch and
subsequently pervades his entire existence on earth. The investiture
hymn of the Mossis (Ouagadougous) expresses with classic concision a
dynamic formula for salvation that only my hypothesis of the surrogate
victim can render intelligible:

You are a turd,

You are a heap of refuse,
You have come to kill us,
You have come to save us.!*

The king has a genuine function identical to that of any sacrificial
victim. He is the catalyst who converts sterile, infectious violence into
positive cultural values. The monarchy might be compared to the factories
that convert household refuse into fertilizer. In both cases the resulting
products are too potent to be applied at full strength; they must be used
with moderation and caution and on occasion be mixed with neutral
agents. The king “fertilizes” a farmer’s field from a safe distance; if he
passes too close the surface will be singed; if he walks on it, a blight will
ensue.

The parallelism between the Oedipus myth and these African obser-
vanices is striking. There is no theme in the myth or the tragedy that does
not find an echo here. In certain cases the regulations relating to incest
seem to reflect the double motif of infanticide and parricide, as in the
formal edict that forever separates the king from his son. In other societies
one can detect reflections of the other double motifs of the myth. Like the
son of Laius, the king of the Nyoros has “two little mothers”, and the chief
of the Jukuns has two mistresses, whom Luc de Heusch compares to the
Nyoro pair.'°

Behind the Athenian pharmakos, behind the Oedipus myth, there is
real violence at work, reciprocal violence brought to an end by the
unanimous slaughter of the surrogate victim. In almost every case the
enthronement or renewal rituals—and in some cases the actual, definitive
death of the monarch—are accompanied by mock combats between two
factions. These ritual confrontations, sometimes enlisting the participa-
tion of the whole community, recall the chaos and factionalism whose
only cure lies in the surrogate victim. And if this violent treatment of a
surrogate victim serves as a model everywhere, it is because it has actually
proved effective in restoring peace and unity. Only the social utility of this
collective violence can account for a politicoritualistic scheme that con-
sists not only of constantly repeating the process but also of making
the surrogate victim the sole arbitrator of all conflicts, proclaiming it a
veritable incarnation of absolute sovereignty.

In many cases succession to the throne entails a ritual battle between
father and son or between sons. Luc de Heusch offers a description of such
a struggle: “The death of the king triggers a war of succession, a war whose
ritualistic character can hardly be underestimated. The princes reputedly
employ their most potent magic medicines to eliminate their fraternal
rivals. At the core of this royal magic contest in Nkole appears the old
theme of enemy brothers. Factions congregate around the various claim-
ants, and the surviving brother is accorded the throne.” As we remarked
earlier, in a conflict whose course is no longer strictly regulated by a
predetermined model, the ritualistic elements disintegrate into actual
events and it becomes impossible to distinguish history from ritual. This
confusion is in itself revealing. A rite retains its vitality only as long as it
serves to channel political and social conflicts of unquestionable reality in
a specific direction. On the other hand, it remains a rite only as long as it
manages to restrict the conflictual modes of expression to rigorously
determined forms.

Wherever we possess detailed descriptions of specific renewal rites, we
observe that they, too, follow the general pattern of the sacrificial crisis,
incorporating its original violence. These rites are to royalty as a whole
what the microcosm is to the macrocosm. The royal rites of Incwala, in
Swaziland, have received particularly careful attention."

As the rites begin the king retires to his sacred enclosure, where he
imbibes various noxious potions and commits incest with a tribal sister.
These actions are intended to augment the king’s si/wane, a term whose
literal translation is “to be like a savage beast.” Although this attribute is
not the exclusive property of the king, it serves to set him apart from his
subjects. The king’s siiwane is always superior to anyone else’s, even that
of his bravest warrior.

During this preparatory period the people intone a hymn, the simémo,
which expresses their hatred of the king and their desire to see him
expelled from the community. From time to time the monarch, more
“savage-beastly” than ever, puts in an appearance. His nudity and the
black paint with which he has decorated his body serve as a symbol of
defiance. There then takes place a mock battle between the people and the
royal clan in which the very person of the king is at stake. Fortified in their
turn with magic potions, and swollen with si/wane—though to a lesser
extent than their chief—the armed warriors encircle the sacred enclosure
and endeavor, as it seems, to take possession of the king, who is protected
by his entourage.

In the course of the rites (presented here in abridged form), a symbolic
execution of the king also occurs. With a touch of his wand the royal
incarnation of violence transfers his own silwane to a cow, thus transform-
ing the animal into a “raging bull,” which is then put to death. As in the
Dinka sacrifices, the warriors hurl themselves all together and without
weapons onto the beast, belaboring it with their fists.

During the ceremony the distance between the king, his entourage, the
warriors, and the rest of his subjects is temporarily effaced. This loss of
differences has nothing to do with “fraternization.” Rather, it is the result
of the violence that engulfs all the participants. T. O. Beidelman defines
this portion of the rites as a dissolving of distinctions.'’ Victor Turner
describes the Incwala as a play of kingship, in the Shakespearean sense of
the expression.

The ceremony unleashes an increasing exaltation, a dynamism that
draws its energy from the very forces it puts in play; forces that initially
seem to claim the king as their victim but from which he eventually
emerges as the absolute ruler. At first almost sacrificed himself, the king
then presides at rites which show him to be the sacrificer par excellence.
There is nothing surprising about this duality; it simply confirms the role
we attributed to the surrogate victim, its ability to master all violence.
Even when he is a victim, the king remains the final arbiter of the contest
and can intervene at any point. He plays all the roles, and no form of
violence, no matter how extreme or eccentric, is foreign to him.

At the height of the battle between the warriors and the king, the king
withdraws once more to his enclosure. He reemerges armed with a gourd,
which he hurls at the shields of his assailants. After this attack, the groups
disband. H. Kuper’s native informants told him that in time of war, any
warrior struck by the royal gourd would forfeit his life. In the light of this
information, the anthropologist suggests that we look upon the warrior
whom the king singles out to be struck by the gourd as a sort of national
scapegoat. This amounts to seeing him as a double for the king, aman who
symbolically dies in his place, as the cow had done earlier in the ceremony.

The Incwala rites begin at the end of an old year and close at the begin-
ning ofa new year. A relationship exists between the crisis commemorated
by the rites and the end of a temporal cycle. The rites follow certain natural
rhythms, but these rhythms can scarcely be regarded as a prime factor in
the ceremonies even if they occasionally seem to overshadow the vio-
lence. For it is the violence whose very presence establishes the essential
function of all myths and rituals: to disguise, to divert, and to banish dis-
order from the community. At the close of the ceremonies a great bonfire
is lit, and on it are consumed all the pollutions accumulated in the course
of the rites and in the course of the past year. A symbolism of cleansing and
purification pervades all the important stages of the ceremony.

To be properly understood royal incest must be perceived as part of a
ritual pattern that is identical with the monarchy itself. The king must be
looked upon as a future sacrificial object; that is, as the replacement for
the surrogate victim. Incest, then, plays a relatively minor role in the
proceedings. Its purpose is to augment the effectiveness of the sacrifice.
And although the sacrifice, directly linked as it is to spontaneous collective
violence, is perfectly intelligible without reference to incest, the incest is
unintelligible without reference to sacrifice.

To be sure, the sacrificial element can disappear completely, while the
incest or incest symbolism persists. This does not mean, however, that the
sacrifice is subsidiary to the incest or that the incest can be considered
without reference to the sacrifice. Rather, the participants have moved so
far from the origin of events that they now regard their own rites from the
same general perspective as Western observers (one is almost tempted to
say “Western voyeurs”). The incest persists owing to its very strangeness. In
the collapse of ritual—which in one sense is not really a collapse, since it
prolongs and reinforces the original delusion—incest alone survives; it
alone is remembered when all else has been forgotten. The African mon-
archy has now been reduced to a tourist attraction. In addition, modern
ethnology has almost invariably isolated institutional incest from its con-
text; it consistently fails to appreciate its meaning because it insists on
viewing incest as an autonomous event, something so remarkable that it
should have a significance all its own, without reference to the surround-
ing phenomena. Psychoanalysts perpetuate this error; one might say they
are its chief perpetrators.

It is by means of incest that the king assumes the mantle of royalty, but
the act itself is “royal” only in its demanding the death of those who
commit it, in its harkening back to the original victim. This becomes
apparent when we turn to a rather remarkable exception in the midst of
those societies that prescribe royal incest; namely, a society in which the
practice is formally and absolutely forbidden. One might suppose that
such a refusal simply entails a reversion to the general rule that prohibits
incest. But matters are not that simple. The practice is not merely rejected
and forbidden as it would be in most societies, but these measures are
accompanied by extraordinary precautions. The monarch’s entourage
undertakes to remove all his close relatives from his presence, and he is
forced to imbibe, not fortifying potions, but debilitating ones. All of which
means, of course, that an aura of incest surrounds the throne, an aura no
less strong than those in the neighboring monarchies where royal incest is
obligatory.'® These special precautionary measures are justified solely by
the king’s dangerous vulnerability to this particular transgression. Thus, it
might be said that the basic criterion of royalty remains the same. Even in
a society that formally excludes incest, the king replaces an original victim
who is believed to have violated the rules of exogamy. It is as the heir and
successor of this victim that the king is considered particularly susceptible
to incest. The copy is assumed to have all the qualities of the original.

The general rule proscribing the practice of incest is here reaffirmed, but
in such a peculiar manner that we can only regard it as an exception to the
exception and classify it with the cultures that practice royal incest. The
essential question is this: Why is the repetition of an incestuous act—
invariably traced back to some original banished transgressor, some
founding father or mythic hero of the community—regarded as salubri-
ous by one society and noxious by its neighbor? A contradiction of this
kind among communities whose religious outlooks, with the exception of
their treatment of incest, are so very similar, seems to defy all efforts at
rational inquiry.

The distribution of a religious theme such as royal incest throughout a
cultural milieu of a certain range and variety suggests that “influences,” in
the traditional sense of the word, are at work. The incest theme cannot be
“original” to each of these cultures; that much seems clear. Does this mean
that my general hypothesis no longer applies?

I maintain that the original act of violence is the matrix of a// ritual and
mythological significations. Strictly speaking, this is only true of an act
whose violence is absolute, so to speak: perfect, completely spontaneous,
extreme. Between this instance of complete originality and the mechan-
ical repetition of rites at the other end of the scale, we can assume the
existence of an infinite number of intermediary forms. The fact that cer-
tain religious and cultural themes pervade a vast area does not exclude
the possibility that truly spontaneous collective violence, working
through one of the intermediary forms and endowed with real (if limited)
creative powers on the mythic and religious level, might occur in many
places. This would explain the many variants of the same myth, the same
cults, from locality to locality, and also the claim made by various places to
be the birthplace of the same god.

It should be noted, however, that even though the myths and rituals are
susceptible to infinite variation in detail, they all revolve around a few
major themes, one of which is incest. As soon as a community begins to
regard an isolated individual as responsible for a sacrificial crisis—that is,
responsible for the disintegration of distinctions within the community—
it follows that this same individual is accused of violating society’s most
fundamental rules, the rules of kinship. In short, the individual is con-
sidered essentially “incestuous” in nature. The theme of the incestuous
outcast is not universal, but it is found in many widely scattered cultural
areas. The fact that the theme turns up spontaneously in so many differ-
ent places is not incompatible with the notion of cultural diffusion within
a broad geographical expanse.

The surrogate-victim hypothesis offers a means of traversing the vast
theoretical terrain between the passivity and excessively rigid continuity
of the diffusionist theories, on the one hand, and the equally rigid
discontinuity of modern formalism, on the other. While not excluding
borrowings from other cultures, my hypothesis confers on these bor-
rowed elements a large degree of autonomy within their new setting. This
accounts for the strange contradiction of the strict requirement and
the formal prohibition of royal incest existing side by side in
neighboring societies. In each instance we can see the same incest theme,
but reinterpreted in terms of local experience.

The ritualistic imagination strives to repeat the original generative pro-
cess. The unanimity that regulates, pacifies, and reconciles supplants the
opposite situation, displacing the paroxysm of violence that divides, des-
troys, and levels. The transition from disruptive violence to order and
peace is almost instantaneous. The two different faces of the primordial
experience are juxtaposed; unanimity is attained in the course of a brief
and terrifying meeting of opposites. All sacrificial rites, then, reproduce
certain forms of violence and appropriate certain associations that seem
more suitable to the sacrificial crisis itself than to its cure. Incest is an
example. In societies where it is an accepted practice, royal incest is
regarded as a means of salvation and, in consequence, an institution to be
carefully preserved. Such a reaction is perfectly intelligible.

The primary—in fact, the sole—purpose of the rite is to prevent the
return of the sacrificial crisis. Incest is a product of this crisis, and even
when it is attributed to the surrogate victim it still signifies the crisis; it
retains a sinister connotation. We can understand, therefore, that the
ritualistic mind might refuse to consider incest as a contribution to the
community’s salvation even in its association with the surrogate victim. It
might persist in regarding incest, even when committed by the represen-
tative and heir of the original victim, as the ultimate act of evil, capable of
plunging the community into a highly contagious form of violence.

Incest, then, is simply another aspect of the affliction that the rites are
designed to prevent. But they attempt to prevent it by means of a cure
that is intimately associated with the most virulent form of the affliction.
The ritualistic mind thus finds itself obliged to separate what cannot be
separated, and the solution must ultimately be an arbitrary one. The ritu-
alistic mind is perhaps more willing than we are to admit that good and
evil are simply two aspects of the same reality, but eventually it must
distinguish between them; even in the ritualistic framework, where there
are fewer differences than in any other area of human culture, a distinc-
tion between the two must be apparent. The purpose of the rite is to
consolidate this difference, newly restored after the terrible undifferentia-
tion of the crisis. There is nothing arbitrary or imaginary about the differ-
ence between violence and nonviolence, but men always treat it as a
difference within a process that is violent from beginning to end. That is
how the rite is made possible. The rite selects a certain form of violence as
“good,” as necessary to the unity of the community, and sets up in oppos-
ition to it another sort of violence that is deemed “bad,” because it is
affiliated to violent reciprocity. In the same way the rite can designate
certain forms of incest as “good”—for example, royal incest—and others
as “bad.” It can equally well decide that all forms of incest are “bad,” and
refuse to admit even royal incest among those actions which, if not actu-
ally sacrificial in character, are still capable of contributing to the sacrificial
powers of the monarch.

Given the fundamental importance to mankind of the transformation
of bad violence into good and the equally fundamental inability of men to
solve the mystery of this transformation, it is not surprising that men are
doomed to ritual; nor is it surprising that the resulting rites assume forms
that are both highly analogous and highly diverse.

That the ritualistic imagination can confront royal incest and derive two
diametrically opposed solutions from it demonstrates both the arbitrary
and the fundamental character of the difference between good (that is,
sacrificial) and bad violence. In each culture, the inverse solution can be
felt behind each chosen solution. In societies where it is an accepted and
even an obligatory practice, incest, even royal incest, still retains a sinister
connotation; it invites punishment and justifies the death of the king. But
in societies where it is forbidden, incest has a certain beneficial quality, in
that the king is perceived as having a special predilection for incest, and
nothing closely associated to the king can be completely bad since the king
brings unity and salvation to the community.

Although incest may have contradictory associations, it is not simply a
pawn on a structural chessboard, to be moved about at will. Nor can it be
added or subtracted from the cultural picture simply to satisfy the whims
of intellectual fashion. We must take care that a formal structuralistic
approach does not strip it completely of its dramatic impact; nor must we
permit psychoanalysis to pass it off as the meaning of meanings.

It is in the domain of general anthropology that orthodox Freudianism
is most vulnerable. There is no formal psychoanalytical explanation of
royal incest, not even of the Oedipus myth; no explanation of the interest-
ing similarities between the Oedipus myth and the African monarchies.
With brilliant intuition, Freud pointed the way toward patricide and
incest, but his disciples failed to follow his lead. Instead of conceding the
impotence of psychoanalysis in dealing with the subject, most scholars,
even those hostile to psychoanalysis, tacitly acknowledge its privilege to
deal with anything remotely concerned with incest. Nobody can approach
the question of royal incest without saluting the stately ghost of Freud. Yet
psychoanalysis has never said, and never can say, anything decisive on
the subject of royal incest, anything that could add substantially to our
understanding or, for that matter, approach the Master at his best.

The almost total absence of the incest motif in late-nineteenth-century
Wester culture led Freud to conclude that all human society is warped by
a universal desire, universally suppressed, to commit maternal incest. The
presence of incest in the mythology and rituals of primitive peoples
seemed to Freud an irrefutable proof of his hypothesis. But psycho-
analysis has never managed to explain why the absence of incest in one
culture has exactly the same significance as the presence of incest in
another. There is no doubt that Freud’s hypothesis was mistaken; but he
often had good reasons for being wrong, whereas those who denounce his
errors often have the wrong reasons for being right.

Freud perceived that the incest and patricide motifs of the Oedipus
myth concealed something essential to the understanding of all aspects of
culture. The cultural context in which he functioned led him to believe
that the crimes attributed to the surrogate victim were indeed the hidden
desires of all men, the secret source of human conduct. Some of the cul-
tural phenomena of the period could be at least partially explained in
terms of the absence of patricidal or incestuous manifestations. Psycho-
analysis could not claim equal success, as limited as this success might be,
in its approach to myths and religion. When patricide and incest are
openly displayed, it is hard to see what it is they are hiding—some
still better hidden instance of incest or patricide, perhaps? Even if one
concedes such a theory, it in no way serves to explain the other themes of
the myth, or even incest itself when it appears in a real form within a
ritualistic framework.'”

Until some other approach succeeds where psychoanalysis has failed,
the claims of psychoanalysis will continue to influence us. However, once
the Freudian interpretation of mythological and ritual incest has been
replaced by another explanation, at once very close to and very far
removed from the Freudian viewpoint, many thematic aspects of the issue
will suddenly become clear, and we will have good cause to believe that
Freud’s theory has finally had its day.

In the African monarchies as in the Oedipus myth, incest—maternal or
otherwise—is not primary matter, absolute and irreducible. It is an allu-
sion that can readily be translated into other terms. The same is true of
patricide, or any of the crimes, perversions, and monstrosities with which
mythology abounds. All these motifs, and others as well, serve to conceal
and disguise rather than reveal the violent elimination of differences. It is
this particular violence that is the suppressed matter of the myths; not
suppressed desire, but terror, terror of absolute violence. And who would
deny that far stronger than desire, in fact the only force that can snuff out
desire, is that nameless but irresistible terror?

Widespread patricide and incest signify the final stages of the sacrificial
crisis. Limited to a single individual, patricide and incest shift the whole
burden of the crisis onto a surrogate victim. The hidden basis of myths is
not sexual; it cannot be, for that motif is openly revealed. Nonetheless,
sexuality is important insofar as it stimulates violence and provides occa-
sions for it to vent its force. Like other natural phenomena, sexuality is a
real presence in myths. In fact, it plays a more important role in them than
does nature itself, but a role that is not truly decisive. Sexuality becomes
almost completely explicit in the incest motif. There it is associated with a
purely individual violence, one, however, that still masks the collective
violence. This violence would surely wipe out the community were it not
for the religious delusion that the surrogate victim provides.

The theory that mythological themes serve to express man’s fear of
natural phenomena has in the twentieth century given way to the idea
that these same themes conceal man’s fear of the purely sexual and
“incestuous” nature of his desires. The two theories are themselves
mythic; like the other theories we have discussed, they function within
the context of myth and help to perpetuate the delusions of myth. How-
ever, the two theories should not be put on the same footing. Freud is less
“mythic” than his predecessors; sex is more involved in human violence
than are thunder and earthquakes, closer to the hidden sources of mythic
elaboration. “Naked” or “pure” sexuality is directly connected to violence.
It is the final veil shielding violence from sight; at the same time it is the
beginning of violence’s revelation. Historically, these two aspects of sexu-
ality often dominate in turn; periods of “sexual liberation” often precede
some violent outburst. This is true even in the chronological sequence of
Freud’s own work. The dynamism of this work tends to transcend the
initial pansexualism to engage itself in the ambiguous enterprise of Totem
and Taboo or the radical concept of the “death wish.” We can thus look on
Freud’s work as a step toward the revelation of something far more pro-
found than the theory of suppressed desires, a theory whose inadequacy
he may have dimly perceived; toward, in fact, the absolute violence still
concealed by a certain delusion, the nature of which remains in the broad
sense “sacrificial.”

Notes

1 Hubert and Mauss, Sacrifice, p. 81.

2 Adolphe E. Jensen, Mythes et cultes chez les peuples primitifs (Paris, 1954),
pp. 206-7.

3 Hubert and Mauss, Sacrifice, p. 83.

4 Cf. Chapter 11, pp. 311-12.

5 Anumber of French scholars have detected in the Oedipus of both myth and
tragedy a pharmakos and a “scapegoat.” According to Marie Delcourt, the
institution of the scapegoat explains the fate of the infant Oedipus, aban-
doned by his parents: “Oedipus is offered as a scapegoat by a father called
Laius, that is to say Publius, the representative of the people.” The murder by
exposure of weak or ill-formed infants was extremely widespread and is cer-
tainly associated with the concept of the surrogate victim—that is, with the
unanimous basis of all sacrificial rites. It is the indication of that unanimity
among the general populace that Marie Delcourt has touched upon here
(Légendes et cultes de héros en Grece [Paris, 1942], p. 102. Cf. also her Oedipe et la
légende du conquérant [Paris, 1944]). More recently, Jean-Pierre Vernant has
taken up these ideas and exploits some of their possibilities in his thematic
analysis of Oedipus the King: “Divine ruler and pharmakos: these are the two
faces of Oedipus. It is this duality that accounts for his enigmatic aspect, that
unites in him, like an ambiguous phrase, two inverse images superimposed
one upon the other. To this inversion in Oedipus’s nature Sophocles appends


a broader meaning: the hero as a reflection of the human condition” (Vernant,
“Ambiguité et renversement,” p. 1271).

6 Cf. Chapter 5, 139-40.

7 H. Sharer, “Die Bedeutung des Menschenopfers im Dagakischen Toten Kult,”
Mitteilungen der deutschen Gesellschaft fiir Volkerkunde 10 (1940). Cited by
Jensen, Mythes et cultes chez les peuples primitifs, p. 198.

8 Jules Henry, Jungle People (New York, 1964), p. 123.

9 Luc de Heusch, Essai sur le symbolisme de l'inceste royal en Afrique (Brussels,
1958).

10 J. Vansina, “Initiation Rite of the Bushong,” Africa 25 (1955): 149-50.
Quoted by Laura Makarius, “Du roi magique au roi divin,” Annales 25, no. 3
(1970):677.

11 Makarius, “Du roi magique au roi divin,” p. 670.

12 Luc de Heusch, “Aspects de la sacralité du pouvoir en Afrique,” in Le Pouvoir et
le sacré (Brussels, 1962). Cited in L. de Lagger, Le Ruanda ancient (Namur,
1939), pp. 209-16.

13 H. J. Krige and J. D. Krige, “The Lovedu of Transvaal,” in African Worlds
(London, 1954).

14 T. Theuws, “Naftre et mourir dans le rituel Luba,” Zaire 14, 2/3 (Brussels)
(1960):172. Quoted by Makarius, “Du roi magique au roi divin,” p. 685.

15 Moro-Naba, film by J. Rouch and D. Zahan. Produced by Comité du film
ethnolographique de I’L.EA.N. Cited by Makarius, “Du roi magique au roi
divin,” p. 685. This parallelism is undoubtedly rooted in the presence of a
sacred monarchy of the African type in archaic Greece. Yet no matter how
legitimate and even necessary this historical hypothesis may be, it does not
really serve to explain the Oedipus myth. In order to explain the relationship
between the myth, ritual, and tragedy, as well as its parallelism with the
African observances, we must have perceived the real mechanism that hides
behind all these cultural accretions—in particular the sacred monarchy,
which can by no means be considered the irreducible element in the analysis.
We must grasp the role of the surrogate victim, that is, the conclusion of a
crisis of reciprocal violence, brought about through unanimous accord
directed or redirected against a victim. In “Ambiguité et renversement,” (pp.
1271-72), Jean-Pierre Vernant has brought together many mythological and
ritualistic details that forcefully suggest the inadequacy of certain fashionable
psychological assumptions and the obstacles they present to a true appreci-
ation of the “scapegoat’s” role and associated phenomena:

The polarity between the king and the scapegoat (a polarity the tragedy
situates at the very heart of the figure of Oedipus) was hardly invented
by Sophocles. It is ingrained in the religious practices and social theories
of the Greeks. The poet has lent it new meaning, however, in making
it the symbol of man’s fundamental ambiguity. If Sophocles chose the
tyrannos-pharmakos to illustrate what we have called the “reversal”
theme, it was because these two opposing figures appear symmetrical
and to some degree interchangeable. Each regards itself as an individual
responsible for the collective salvation of the group. In the works of
Homer and Hesiod it is the king, an offspring of Zeus, who is responsible
for the fertility of the soil, the herds, and the women. As long as he
shows himself irreproachable (amumén) in the dispensing of justice, his
people prosper; but if he falters, the whole community pays the penalty
for the failing of this one individual. The gods then visit misfortune on
all—limos and loimos, “famine” and “plague.” The men kill each other,
the women cease to bear children, the earth remains sterile and the
flocks and herds no longer reproduce. When such a divine calamity
descends on a people their natural recourse is to sacrifice their king. For
if the king is responsible for the community’s fertility and this fertility
ceases, that indicates that the power invested in him as sovereign has
somehow become inverted; his justice turns to crime, his integrity to
corruption, and the best (aristos) seems to be replaced by the worst (Kakis-
tos). The legends of Lycurgus, Athamas, and Oinoclus therefore involve,
as a means of putting the Joimos to rout, the lapidation of the king, his
ritual murder, or the sacrifice of his son. But there are also instances
where a member of the community is delegated to assume the role of the
unworthy king, the antisovereign. The king then unloads on this
inverted image of himself all his negative attributes. We now have the
true pharmakos: the king’s double, but in reverse. He is similar to those
mock kings who are crowned at carnival time, when everything is set
topsy-turvy and social hierarchies turned upside down; when sexual
prohibitions are lifted, and theft permitted; when servants take the place
of their masters and women exchange clothing with men; when, in
short, the throne is yielded only to the basest, ugliest, most ridiculous
and criminal of beings. But once the carnival is over the anti-king is
expelled from the community or put to death, and his disappearance
puts an end to all the disorder that his person served to symbolize for the
community and also to purge for it.

Vernant’s observations on Oedipus and the African monarchies are equally
applicable to many other cases, for they ultimately concern the ritualistic
response to the presence of violence. Once we recognize the role of unani-
mity in the operation of the surrogate victim, it becomes clear that in these
instances we are not dealing with gratuitous elaborations of superstition. That
is why Sophocles’ version should not be looked upon as something entirely
new that adds a further dimension to the myth but as a reduction, the partial
demolishing of its mythological meaning, both in regard to modern psych-
ology and sociology and in regard to other ancient myths. The poet lends no
“new meaning” to the royal scapegoat, he simply draws nearer the universal
source of meanings.

T. O. Beidelman, “Swazi Royal Ritual,” Africa 36 (1966):373-405; P. A. W.
Cook, “The Inqwala Ceremony of the Swazi,” Bantu Studies 4 (1930): 205-10;
M. Gluckman, Rituals of Rebellion in South-East Africa (Manchester, 1954);
H. Kuper, “A Ritual Kingship among the Swazi,” Africa 14 (1944;230-56;
H. Kuper, The Swazi: A South African Kingdom (New York, 1964); E. Norbeck,
“African Rituals of Conflict,” American Anthropologist 65 (1963):1254-79.
Beidelman, “Swazi Royal Ritual,” p. 391, n. 1.

“The Nioka impose continence on their chief for the rest of his life. He is
obliged to send away all the women of his household, wear a penis sheath at
all times, and take sedative drugs. Among the Njumbas of Kasai, the ‘chief
wife’ (the first wife of the chief) is required to take medications that produce
not only sterility but a complete suppression of the menstrual cycle. The
excessive character of these customs can be readily explained in terms of the
conflict between a tradition of royal incest and the desire to allow no breach
of the exogamic prohibition. The Pendes, in fact, regard any hint of royal
incest with great severity, and they dismissed a chieftain from his position
because he had once, as a warrior, treated his sister for an abdominal abscess:
‘You have seen the nakedness of your sister; you are no longer fit to be our
chief” (Makarius, “Du roi magique au roi divin,” p. 671). On the Pendes, see
L. Sousberge, “Etuis péniens ou gaines de chasteté chez les ba-Pende,” Africa
24 (1954), and “Structures de parenté et alliance d’aprés les formules
Pende,” Mémoires de l'Académie royale des sciences coloniales belges 4, no. 1
(1951).

The most favorable situation for psychoanalytic theories of this sort would
be the total absence of incest and patricide from the entire corpus of mytho-
logy and ritual. However, psychoanalysis could also adjust to its constant
presence, to a continual intrusion of incest and patricide motifs. The truth
lies between these extremes. Patricide figures in mythology and ritual, but
hardly more than any other type of criminal activity; the same applies to
incest. Among the different kinds of incest, maternal incest will at most
play the role of primus inter pares, unless it is replaced by the incestuous
relationship with a sister or some other relative; but never so fully or
so systematically that one can attribute it merely to a reflex of the
“unconscious.”

A statistical survey has been made dealing with violence between relations
in myths of the “Oedipus type.” These myths were drawn from some fifty
selected cultures, more or less evenly distributed within the six broad cultural
regions defined by Murdock. Clyde Kluckhohn sums up the results: “One can
make a good case for ‘antagonism against close relatives—usually of the same
sex’ as a prominent motif, and a fair case for physical violence against such
relatives. But neither parricide nor Raglan’s regicide motifs will stand up
literally without a great deal of farfetched interpretation” (“Recurrent
Themes in Myths and Mythmaking,” pp. 53-54).

Dionysus


Almost every society has festivals that have retained a ritualistic character
over the centuries. Of particular interest to the modern inquirer are
observances involving the deliberate violation of established laws; for
example, celebrations in which sexual promiscuity is not only tolerated
but prescribed or in which incest becomes the required practice.

Such violations must be viewed in their broadest context: that of the
overall elimination of differences. Family and social hierarchies are tem-
porarily suppressed or inverted; children no longer respect their parents,
servants their masters, vassals their lords. This motif is reflected in the
esthetics of the holiday—the display of clashing colors, the parading of
transvestite figures, the slapstick antics of piebald “fools.” For the duration
of the festival unnatural acts and outrageous behavior are permitted, even
encouraged.

As one might expect, this destruction of differences is often accompanied
by violence and strife. Subordinates hurl insults at their superiors; various
social factions exchange gibes and abuse. Disputes rage in the midst of
disorder. In many instances the motif of rivalry makes its appearance in
the guise of a contest, game, or sporting event that has assumed a quasi-
ritualistic cast. Work is suspended, and the celebrants give themselves
over to drunken revelry and the consumption of all the food amassed over
the course of many months.

Ihave no doubt that these festivities commemorate a sacrificial crisis. It
may seem strange to memorialize a traumatic event in such an uproarious
manner, but the explanation lies ready to hand. The specifically “festive”
aspects of the celebration, those that most effectively capture the
attention, that dominate the spectacle, and that are the only ones to
survive the evolutionary transformations of the festival—these aspects
have nothing to do with the festival’s underlying cause. The fundamental
purpose of the festival is to set the stage for a sacrificial act that marks at
once the climax and the termination of the festivities. Roger Caillois has
pointed out the sacrificial origin of festivals.' If the crisis brought on by the
loss of distinctions and the subsequent advent of reciprocal violence can
be celebrated in such a jubilant fashion, it is because these holocausts are
seen in retrospect as the initial stages of a cathartic process. The beneficial
character of the generative unanimity tends to be projected onto the past,
affecting the initial impression of the crisis and making it seem other than
it was. The violent dismissal of distinctions now acquires a favorable
connotation, which will eventually manifest itself as a festive display.

I have already advanced a number of interpretations that may prove
relevant to the subject of festivals. For example, ritual incest ultimately
acquires a beneficial aspect that seems to be almost wholly independent of
its sacrificial quality. In certain societies the aristocrats, and even the
artisans, have recourse to ritual incest, more or less furtively, to bring
them good luck before a difficult or hazardous undertaking. The rites
performed during the enthronement of certain African monarchs or in
the course of renewal ceremonies often resemble festival practices. Con-
versely, in festivals in which the monarch plays no direct role we
encounter a substitute king—sometimes a “king of fools’*—who is himself
nothing more than a sacrificial victim endowed with sacral privileges; at
the conclusion of the festivities, he or his representative will be sacrificed.
The king’s sovereignty—real or imagined, permanent or temporary—
seems to derive from an original, generative act of violence inflicted on a
surrogate victim.

The function of the festival is no different from the function of other
sacrificial rites. As Emile Durkheim perceived, the festival revitalizes the
cultural order by reenacting its conception, reproducing an experience
that is viewed as the source of health and abundance; reenacting, in fact,
the moment when the fear of falling into interminable violence is most
intense and the community is therefore most closely drawn together.

Primitive peoples regard their cultural tradition as a fragile and precious
inheritance to be carefully nurtured and protected from any change, for
change could only serve to damage it, perhaps mortally. The skepticism
and resentment we moderns feel toward taboos of any kind, which feel-
ings we tend to assume are shared by primitive peoples, play no part in
their festivities. The often-cited syndrome of “release of tensions” or that
much-ridden hobby-horse of psychosociologists, the “necessary outlet,”
has relevance only to a single aspect of the ritual process, and an exclusive
emphasis on these syndromes distorts the original spirit of the ritual.

Festivals are based on the assumption that there is a direct link between
the sacrificial crisis and its resolution. The crisis is inseparable from its
happy ending and becomes itself a cause for jubilation. But this interpret-
ation is not the only one possible. As we have already noticed in the case
of royal incest, religious thinking on the relationship between the crisis
and its conclusion can result in two divergent viewpoints. Either it is the
continuity between crisis and conclusion that strikes the imagination, or it
is the rupture; in each instance, the resulting interpretation must be both
partially true and partially false. Yet religious thinking tends to adopt one
or another of the two solutions and cling to it for dear life—even if, at the
outset, the choice could easily have gone the other way.

It can be assumed almost a priori that certain societies will opt for the
second solution, the one that emphasizes the rupture between the crisis
and the founding violence. In such cases another kind of festival will arise,
one that, in comparison with the festival we have been describing, might
perhaps be called an antifestival. The rites of sacrificial expulsion are not
preceded by a period of frenzied anarchy, but by an extreme austerity and
an increased rigor in the observance of all interdicts. Extraordinary pre-
cautions are taken to prevent the community from falling prey once again
to reciprocal violence.

In fact, both solutions can be observed. In some societies we encounter
ritual occasions that resemble festivals—there is the same periodicity, the
same interruption of normal activities, the same rites of sacrificial expul-
sion—and yet are so very different from festivals that they constitute a
vexing problem for ethnologists, one similar to the enigma of royal incest,
which is accepted in some societies and forbidden in others. Far from
being temporarily suspended, in the antifestival all cultural prohibitions
are strongly reinforced.

The rites of the Swazi Incwala correspond closely to the definition of the
antifestival. Throughout the period of observance all sexual activity,
including the most legitimate, is forbidden. Sleeping late in the morning is
regarded as a crime, and physical contact between individuals is to be
avoided, even physical contact with one’s own body (the celebrants are
not supposed to wash or to scratch themselves). A threat of imminent
pollution—that is, of violence—hangs over the entire community. As
singing and loud noise are prohibited. Children are scolded if they grow
noisy at play.

In The Golden Bough Frazer offers a fine example of an antifestival. For
several weeks in the year the Cape tribe on the Gold Coast permit no
sound of tom-toms or musket fire. Public conversations are forbidden. Ifa
dispute arises and voices are raised, the contesting parties are summoned
before the chieftain, who deals out stiff fines to everyone involved. To
avoid arguments over strayed livestock, all lost animals become the prop-
erty of their finders, and the original owners are obliged to relinquish
all claim.

It seems clear that such measures are intended to prevent the outbreak
of widespread violence. Frazer offers no explanation for them, but his
anthropological intuition (far superior to his theorizing) prompted him to
classify these practices under the rubric of festivals. The logic of the
antifestival is as strict as that of the festival. The goal is to reproduce the
beneficial effects of violent unanimity while abbreviating as much as
possible the terrible preliminaries—which, in the case of the antifestival,
are perceived in a negative light. The longer the interval between any two
purifying rituals, the greater the danger of a violent explosion. Impurities
accumulate; and in the period immediately preceding the celebration of
the rite, a period saturated with the memory of the sacrificial crisis, every-
one moves with extreme caution. It is as if the community had suddenly
become an arsenal piled high with gunpowder. The Saturnalia has been
transformed into its opposite, the feast changed to a fast; but the purpose
of the ritual remains the same.

In addition to the festival and the antifestival, one finds, as might have
been expected, “mixed” ceremonies resulting from a more complex, more
nuanced concept of the relationship between the crisis and the restoration
of order, a concept that takes into account both the continuity and the
discontinuity between them. In some instances at least these variations
can be seen as a late development, resulting from the sheer remoteness of
the original violence; that is, from the cumulative effect of mythological
elaboration.

All too often we go astray when examining the nature of the festival
and allow our attention to be diverted to secondary aspects. Under these
circumstances the events hidden behind the rite become increasingly
inaccessible, and the rite’s unity of purpose splinters into many incompat-
ible segments. At the very point when the religious aspects of the rite have
begun to reflect an ignorance equal to our own, the rite suddenly appears
to have a timely and original function, whereas this function is in fact
belated and derivative. The asceticism and mortifications of the antifesti-
vals seems very far removed from the kind of activity we associate with a
festival. We fail to grasp that they share a common origin and that in those
communities where the ritual has retained its greatest vitality they often
achieve a “dialectical” equilibrium. The more the rites diverge from their
true function, the more differentiated they appear and the more interest-
ing they become to scholars, who can sort them out in different categories.

Modem scholarship, notably since Frazer, is no longer unaware that
certain festivals entailed human sacrifice. Nonetheless, we are still far
from suspecting that the distinctive traits of this practice and their
innumerable variations can be traced back directly or indirectly to a gen-
erative act of collective violence, a liberating gesture of mob anger. The
origin of the festival can still be discerned, even in those instances where
sacrificial immolation has been eliminated from the proceedings. The dis-
appearance of the sacrificial event may lead to new rites whose sacrificial
character is easily identifiable—trites of exorcism, for example. These rites
occupy the same place as the vanished sacrifice, and even when they
are not directly linked to sacrifice they serve the same function in the
ceremonies. In short, they can be said to be a replacement for the sacrifice.

What is the correct procedure for ridding a person or place of devils and
evil spirits? Often it is a matter of shouting, clanging weapons or cooking
vessels, and beating the air with a stick. Nothing seems more natural than
to take a broom to the devil—if, that is, one is stupid enough to believe in
his existence. The modern intellectual, the “liberated” Frazerian, there-
fore concludes that primitives liken the spirit of evil to some great beast
that takes to its heels when frightened. The rationalistic mind does not
bother with customs that seem not only puerile in conception but lacking
all reason.

In this case as in many others a complacent intellect and the seeming
“naturalness” of the circumstances can serve to conceal their most
interesting aspects. In principle, the act of exorcism is an act of violence
perpetrated against the devil or his associates. In some festivals this
terminal violence is preceded by mock combat between the exorcists
themselves. We recognize here a pattern repeated in many sacrificial
rites: the actual immolation is preceded by ritual disputes between the
sacrificers, in which the violence is to some extent simulated. This
phenomenon of mock combat must stem in all instances from the same
general source.

In an example adduced by Frazer, the young men of the village go from
house to house, pausing at each to perform the rites of exorcism. The tour
begins with a quarrel about which house to visit first. (As a good positivist,
Frazer takes care to include even those details that do not fit neatly into
his own scheme; for this reason alone he deserves our gratitude and
respect.) The preliminary quarrel is a reminder of the sacrificial crisis;
the sacrifice or exorcism that follows emulates the unanimous violence
which is, in effect, promptly grafted onto the reciprocal violence and
distinguished from it only by its miraculous results.

At the conclusion of the quarrel unanimity is achieved, and the
moment has come for the surrogate victim, for the performance of the
sacrifice. The object of the quarrel is ostensibly the sacrifice itself; that is,
the selection of the victim. In the course of the quarrel each disputant
strives to put in a final word, reducing his antagonist to silence; each
wants to get in the decisive blow, the one that permits no response and
that will therefore serve as a model for the rite itself.

Greek legends often contain vague reference to a sacrifice—a human
sacrifice—offered by a community, city, or army to some god. The persons
involved agree on the need for such a sacrifice but disagree on the choice
of victim. To understand the situation the investigator must reverse the
order of events. First comes the violence, spontaneous and senseless; then
comes the sacrificial explanation, genuinely sacrificial in that it conceals
the senseless and basically intolerable aspect of the violence. The sacri-
ficial explanation is rooted in an act of terminal violence, violence that can
only be labeled sacrificial retrospectively, because it brought all hostilities
to an end. These stories may represent the minimal form of mythological
fabrication. A collective murder that brings about the restoration of order
imposes a kind of ritualistic framework on the savage fury of the group, all
of whose members are out for one another’s blood. Murder becomes sac-
rifice; the angry free-for-all that preceded it is transformed into a ritual
dispute over the choice of the most suitable victim, one that satisfies the
piety of the faithful or has been selected by the god. In effect, the real
question behind these preliminaries is, Who will kill whom?

The dispute concerning the first dwelling to be exorcised screens the same
conflictual process, leading to the violent resolution of the crisis. Exorcism
represents the last chain in a series of reprisals.

Having succumbed to reciprocal violence, the celebrants as a group vent
their fury on the empty air. We see here manifested a truth common to all
rites, but never more clearly displayed than in this type of exorcism. Ritual
violence awakens no hostility, confronts no antagonist; as long as their
blows are directed as a group against an insubstantial presence, which for
excellent reasons shows no tendency to retaliate in kind, the exorcists are
not likely to resume their quarrel. And here the rite reveals its origin and
function. The unanimity attained through the intervention of the surro-
gate victim must not be lost. The community stands united before the
onslaught of “evil spirits” and remains faithful to its vow to reject mutual
hostility. The rite reaffirms and reinforces this resolution. And religious
thought returns again and again to that supreme wonder, that last word of
violence, which is all the more precious for being pronounced so late in
the day. Sacrifice is the boon worthy above all others of being preserved,
celebrated and memorialized, reiterated and reenacted in a thousand
different forms, for it alone can prevent transcendental violence from
turning back into reciprocal violence, the violence that really hurts,
setting man against man and threatening the total destruction of the
community.

This general theory of the sacrificial crisis and violent unanimity seems
to clarify aspects of the festival that have hitherto remained obscure. As
the ritualistic aspects of the festival dwindle, it degenerates into a com-
munal “letting off of steam”—the very idea of the festival held dear by
modern scholars. The gradual loss of ritualistic structure and the con-
stantly increasing misunderstandings surrounding the festival seem to go
hand in hand. The disintegration of myths and rituals, and indeed of
religious thought in general, leads not to genuine demythologizing, but to
the outbreak of a new sacrificial crisis.

The joyous, peaceful facade of the deritualized festival, stripped of any
reference to a surrogate victim and its unifying powers, rests on the
framework of a sacrificial crisis attended by reciprocal violence. That is
why genuine artists can still sense that tragedy lurks somewhere behind
the bland festivals, the tawdry utopianism of the “leisure society.” The
more trivial, vulgar, and banal holidays become, the more acutely one
senses the approach of something uncanny and terrifying. The theme of
holiday-gone-wrong dominates Fellini’s films and has recently surfaced in
various different forms in the work of many other artists.

The holiday-gone-wrong serves nicely to symbolize decadence. As an
artistic motif it is rich in fruitful paradoxes. What is more, it is a very real
part of the scene in any decadent society. To ascertain this we have only to
look at the festal practices of obviously failing societies, such as
the Yanomamé, who are torn apart by perpetual civil war, or even more
strikingly, of societies in the final stages of disintegration, such as the
Kaingang. The festival as celebrated in these societies has lost all its ritual
characteristics; it has “gone wrong” in the sense that it has reverted to its
violent origins. Instead of holding violence in check, the ceremonies
inaugurate a new cycle of revenge. By a process of inversion that can
befall all rites and that we have already had occasion to observe in the case
of sacrificial rites, the festival ceases to function as a preventive measure
and lends its support to the forces of destruction:

The killing was to be done in traditional Kaingang style; they [the future
victims] were to be invited to a festa, made to drink, and then slaughtered.
Although the Kaingang associate festas with quarreling and murder they never
refused an invitation to one even though they knew their lives were in danger.
One might imagine that at a festa where large sections of the tribe came
together to enjoy themselves the bonds of kinship would be renewed and
strengthened and old attachments of man for man would draw new warmth
from the general good feeling.

Although this was true of some Kaingang festas they were as often the scene
of violent quarreling and disruption as they were of friendliness and solidarity.
The men and women got drunk, and the men boasted to their children of their
invulnerability and their deeds of blood. The men “told their waikayu” [hubris]
“walking about, shaking either clubs or lances, slashing at the air, crying out
the deeds they had done and the murders they would yet commit. As the beer
and the excitement mounted to their heads they turned on their neighbors and
quarreled with them because they suspected them of adultery with their wives
or because they themselves had had affairs with their neighbors’ wives and
themselves felt suspected and hated.”

Kaingang folklore abounds in accounts of festivals that turn into
massacres, and the Kaingang expression “We shall make beer for him” has
decidedly sinister connotations.

Let us now apply our newfound concept of the festival to the myth of
Dionysus, as portrayed in Euripides’ tragedy The Bacchae. This analysis will
concern itself with issues referred to in the discussion of the Oedipus
myth; I hope it will help to clarify my thesis of the role of violence while
also directing attention to new problems of significance.

A bacchanal is a festival in the sense just defined; it displays all
the characteristics previously discussed. The Bacchae begins as a ritual
bacchanal. The poet underlines the destruction of distinctions as the god
sweeps away all the barriers that usually divide mortals: wealth, age, sex,
and so on. Everyone is called on to worship Dionysus; the chorus
proclaims that graybeards will now mingle with youths, women will be
on a par with men.

The bacchanal portrayed by Euripides involves the women of Thebes.
Having established his worship in Asia, Dionysus arrives in his native city
in the guise of a young disciple of his own cult who exerts a potent influ-
ence over almost everyone who encounters him. Seized by the spirit of
the god, Dionysus’s own aunt Agaué, his cousin Ino, and all the women of
Thebes desert hearth and home to wander the slopes of Mount Cithaeron,
celebrating the first bacchanal.

Idyllic at first, the bacchantes’ revel soon becomes a bloodthirsty
nightmare. The delirious women hurl themselves indiscriminately on
men and beasts. Only Pentheus, king of Thebes and son of Agaué, persists
in denying the divinity of his cousin. Like Tiresias and Creon in Oedipus the
King, Pentheus is an outsider who, before succumbing to the universal
frenzy, lucidly defines the situation: “I have just returned from my travels
to hear news of the strange illness that afflicts our city.”

The “strange illness” is clearly the sacrificial crisis. It has struck with
lightning speed, inciting its victims to irrational acts. The sacrificial crisis
makes no distinction between those who submit to its demands out of
prudence or opportunism—like the two old men—and the only man who
has the boldness to reject it—the unfortunate Pentheus. Whether one
chooses to fight or to submit, violence triumphs.

Throughout the tragedy the Bacchic spirit is presented as indistinguish-
able from the infectious evil. Pentheus rebukes his grandfather, who has
attempted to persuade him to join in worshiping the god: “Do not breathe
your infection on me; go and play the bacchant.” The Dionysiac outbreak
spells the disintegration of social institutions and the collapse of the
cultural order; both of which disasters are dramatically symbolized by the
destruction of the royal palace at the climax of the action. It is futile to
attempt to restrain the god of violence. Pentheus tries to imprison the
defiant youth whose form Dionysus has assumed; but even as everything
around him is engulfed in flame, the god steps forth unharmed from the
ruins.

The Bacchae takes as its subject a festival that goes wrong. And we will
hardly be surprised at this unpleasant turn of events when we consider
that this bacchanal is none other than the original bacchanal; that is, the
sacrificial crisis. The tragedy seems to offer strong evidence in support of
my theory of the meaning of festivals. It traces the festival back to its
violent beginnings, back to its origins in reciprocal violence. Euripides
subjects the myth and worship of Dionysus to the same sort of treatment
that Sophocles applied to the Oedipus myth. He brings into play the
conflictual symmetry behind the mythological message (and, as with
Oedipus, behind the rite)—a message that conceals this symmetry at least
as much as it displays it.

The playwright’s task was made easier because the bacchanal perpetu-
ates an essential aspect of the sacrificial crisis: the destruction of differ-
ences. Beginning as a gesture of harmony, the Dionysiac elimination of
distinctions rapidly degenerates into a particularly virulent form of violent
nondifferentiation. The abolishment of sexual differences, which appears
in the ritual bacchanal as a celebration of love and brotherhood, becomes
in the tragedy an act of hostility. The women take up the most violent
masculine activities, hunting and warfare. They deride men for their
weakness and femininity. Dionysus, in the guise of a long-haired ado-
lescent, personally takes a hand in fomenting the disorder. Pentheus, hav-
ing reproached the god for his effeminate appearance, is seized by the
desire to disguise himself in woman’s dress so that he can spy on the
bacchantes on the slopes of Mount Cithaeron.

We also find in The Bacchae reference to that loss of distinction between
man and beast that is always linked to violence. The bacchantes hurl
themselves on a herd of cattle, which they mistake for prying men, and
tear them apart with their bare hands. And Pentheus, mad with rage,
imprisons a bull in his stable in the belief that he has captured Dionysus
himself. Agaué commits the inverse error: when the bacchantes discover
her son Pentheus spying on them, she mistakes him for a “young lion”
and strikes the first blow to kill him.

Another difference that tends to disappear in the course of the tragedy
is the seemingly indelible distinction between man and god—in this
instance, between Pentheus and Dionysus. There is no aspect of Dionysus
that fails to find a reflection in Pentheus. Dionysus is a dual figure. On the
one hand, there is the Dionysus of the Maenads, the defender of divine
and human laws, the jealous guardian of legality; on the other, there is the
subversive agent-provocateur of the tragedy, the figure we have considered
above. This same duality can be seen in Pentheus. The king of Thebes
introduces himself to us as a pious conservative, a guardian of traditional
values. Yet the chorus denounces him as a bold lawbreaker whose
blasphemy exposes the city to divine retribution. There is no doubt that


Pentheus contributes to the chaos he claims to oppose. He dons the garb of
a bacchant and becomes possessed by Dionysus; that is, by violence—a
violence that eliminates all distinctions between creatures, whether
“men” or “gods,” through the paradoxical means of fierce antagonism.

The characteristics of each protagonist are all reproduced, to a degree, in
the other. For example, the divinity of Dionysus is counterbalanced by a
secret humanity implied by his appearance as a long-haired youth. Simi-
larly, the humanity of Pentheus is counterbalanced, if not by divinity, at
least by a delusion of divinity, revealed in the superhuman claims that
accompany his final submission to the Dionysiac spirit: “Could I not lift up
on my shoulders Cithaeron and all its groves, with all the reveling
bacchantes?”

In the Dionysiac frenzy all differences between man and god tend to
disappear. If there is a voice of Dionysiac orthodoxy in the play it can only
be that of the Lydian Maenads, who address us in unequivocal terms.
God-inspired madness has made each celebrant another Dionysus. The
Lydian chorus declares, “Who leads the dance becomes a Bromios!”

It has been said that the delirium of Pentheus and the Theban
bacchantes is due to a culpable hubris, whereas everything relating to
Dionysus and his Maenads is truly divine. Even the worst forms of
violence are legitimate because god is god and man is man. There is some
apparent truth in that. As far as the overall plot of the play is concerned,
the difference between man and god is never lost sight of; in fact, it is
strongly proclaimed at the beginning and end of the tragedy. Yet in the
middle all differences mingle and dissolve, including the distinction
between human and divine.

As we have seen, tragic inspiration leads to the same results in The
Bacchae as in Oedipus the King. Mythological and ritual values are abolished
by reciprocal violence. The subjective nature of all differences is exposed.
We are compelled to confront a vital question pertaining to myth and the
cultural order. Sophocles stopped just short of framing this question and
concludes by reaffirming the compromised mythological values. Euripides
follows the same procedure in The Bacchae. The symmetry is so implacably
applied that in the end it dissolves the difference between man and god.
Divinity becomes nothing more than a prize in the struggle between two
rivals: “You know . .. how happy you are when a great crowd greets you
at your doors, and all the city glorifies the name of Pentheus. Bacchus also
loves such honors, I am sure. .. .”

In any case, at the end of the play the uniqueness of the deity is
reaffirmed, and in terrifying fashion. It is made abundantly clear that
no real contest ever existed between the omnipotent Dionysus and the
culpably weak Pentheus. The triumph of difference once again shields
from sight the recently exposed tragic symmetry. Once again tragedy
seems to oscillate between audacity and indecision. In the case of
Sophocles the conflict between the symmetry of the tragic action and the
dissymetry of the mythological content is our only reason for believing
that the poet, knowingly or unknowingly, recoiled before an act of even
greater audacity. In the case of The Bacchae the same textual conflict
is present, and we are led by the same process to a similar conclusion:
Euripides, too, backed off from commiting an act of even greater audacity.
But this time the backing off is not performed in silence. His tragedies
contain numerous passages whose emphatic tone and repetition of theme
clearly mark them as expressions of the poet’s decision to retreat and his
attempts to justify himself:

Human wisdom is not wisdom, and to aspire to more than man’s due is to
shorten life, is to sacrifice the fruit at hand for what is out of reach. I think it is
sheer madness or plain stupidity to act in such a manner. . .. Keep heart and
mind aloof from overreaching intellects.

The beliefs and practices common to the common man are good enough for me.

Scholars are far from agreement on the interpretation of such passages,
and much of the modern debate on Euripides centers on this problem. It
may be that the whole question has been falsified by a postulate implicitly
accepted by all the commentators. This postulate relates to the type of
knowledge the poet has declined to confront. We have taken it for granted
that such knowledge cannot be unknown to us; the idea that anyone so
remote from “modern thought” as Euripides could have perceived a
danger wholly unsuspected by us, could have anticipated a truth whose
existence has escaped us completely, hardly seems worth consideration.

Modern critics are convinced that Euripides drew back before that same
skepticism of which they are themselves the proud proponents—an intel-
lectual viewpoint that denies the existence of a real basis for religion and
declares the whole institution purely “imaginary.” Euripides, they suggest,
hesitated from conventional propriety or simple prejudice to acknowledge
that religion was nothing more than mystification, an illusion specifically
designed to offer consolation or impose restraints. Timidity kept him from
acknowledging that religion was a figment of the imagination.


The modern intellectual is a romantic soul who likes to think of himself
as the boldest iconoclast in history. At times he cannot but challenge the
high place accorded Euripides by tradition and wonder whether the poet
is not essentially too “bourgeois” in spirit to warrant such esteem.

But Euripides speaks less in terms of religious “faith,” in the modern
sense, than in terms of the transgressing of limits, of the fearsome know-
ledge that exists beyond these limits. We do not seem to be dealing in his
case with a simple choice between belief and disbelief—two equally
abstract concepts. Something else is at play, something more to the point
than sterile religious scepticism. This something else, still to be discerned,
is nonetheless near at hand, in the text of The Bacchae.

The murder of Pentheus serves as both culmination and resolution of a
crisis provoked by the god himself in “revenge” for the Thebans’ failure to
pay homage to him, and especially for the resistance of his own family.
Having brought about Pentheus’ death, the god banishes the rest of the
family from the city. Peace and harmony now return to Thebes, which
will henceforth honor the god in the manner ordained by him.

The murder thus appears as the outcome of a divine plan and, at the
same time, the result of a spontaneous outburst. The divine plan falls
within the formalized framework of ritual sacrifice. In this instance the
god himself is the sacrificer and prepares the future victim; the sacrificial
act ordained by him coincides with the act of revenge that will appease
his anger. Under the pretext of arranging his costume and coiffure,
Dionysus manages to touch Pentheus ritualistically on his head, waist,
and feet. The murder itself is performed in accordance with Dionysiac
practice; it includes the distinctive sparagmos, or dismemberment, which
we have already encountered in other sacrificial contexts. In addition (1)
all the bacchantes participate in the killing. This satisfies the require-
ments of unanimity, which figures in so many rituals. And (2) no
weapon is used; the victim is torn apart by the women’s bare hands.
Such a performance is not peculiar to the Dionysiac cult. We have
already cited two examples of collective murders without weapons, one
in a Dinka sacrifice and the other part of the Swazi Incwala, where a
cow is substituted for the king; there are many similar examples. The
assertion—made by Rudolf Otto, among others—that the Dionysiac rites
were unique can easily be disproved. There is no aspect of the Dionysiac
myth or ritual that does not find a distinct echo in many primitive
societies.

The Euripidean version of the myth emphasizes the spontaneous aspect
of the ritualistic proceedings and thus affords us a fleeting glimpse—or at
least a strong intimation—of a real relationship between the rite and a
past event, grounded in fact and partially reconstituted by the dramatist.
The dismemberment of a living victim by unarmed assailants, each par-
ticipating wholly in the act, takes on a clear meaning. Even without
Euripides’ detailed description we can imagine the original scene. It would
not have been a case of premeditated assassination. Everything suggests a
crowd whose intentions were initially pacific; a disorganized mob that for
unknown reasons (of no real importance to our argument) came to a high
pitch of mass hysteria. The crowd finally hurled itself on one individual;
even though he had no particular qualifications for this role, he served to
polarize all the fears, anxieties, and hostilities of the crowd. His violent
death provided the necessary outlet for the mass anguish, and restored
peace.*

The ritual sparagmos reenacts with scrupulous exactitude the mob
violence that brought riot and disorder to an end. In the ritual perform-
ance, the community tries to mimic the gestures that effected its salvation.
It is also trying, paradoxically enough, to recapture through ritual the
element of complete spontaneity. Here, as elsewhere, tragedy occupies an
ambiguous, intermediary position between the ritual performance and
the spontaneous model that the ritual attempts to reproduce. From the
point of view of established religious doctrine, Dionysus is wholly
responsible for Pentheus’ murder. After all, the god is master of events; it
is he who prepares from afar the details of the first sacrifice, his own
sacrificial enterprise that is the most awesome and effective of all sacri-
fices, the one that truly mends the shattered community. But from the
point of view of a religion-in-the-making, the murder of Pentheus
appears as a spontaneous resolution that could be neither planned nor
anticipated.

The collective violence is openly displayed, but the essential process—
the arbitrary choice of the victim and the sacrificial substitution that
restores unity—remains concealed. The actual expulsion of the victim
recedes from sight and maintains its efficiency by appearing only in the
guise of institutionalized sacrifice. From the viewpoint of the sacrificial
crisis, the relationship between the doubles, Dionysus and Pentheus, is
reciprocal in a double sense. There is no reason why it should be Dionysus
rather than Pentheus who sacrifices his companion. Yet from the
viewpoint of established religion, even if this reciprocity is at one level
acknowledged and the sacrificer and his victim are recognized as doubles,
on another and more basic level this same reciprocity is abolished. The
direction must not be allowed to reverse itself; it has been fixed once and
for all, and the expulsion is always understood to have already taken place.

We cannot hope to understand the rite merely by attributing it to
psychic motivations, either conscious or unconscious. And in spite of all
appearances, gratuitous sadism plays no part in the procedure. The rite is
directed toward order and tranquillity, not violence. It strives to achieve
violence solely in order to eliminate it. Nothing is more naive or, in the
final analysis, more futile than the speculations psychological theorists
derive from the brutality of a rite such as the sparagmas.

The Bacchae offers ample evidence in support of my definition of
sacrifice, Euripides’ tragedy and the whole cult of Dionysus seem to
provide strong support for the hypothesis that traces myth and ritual to a
generative act of unanimity.

The impartial reader, approaching the play free of the influence of
Nietzsche or Rudolf Otto, is always struck by the sheer perfidy of
Dionysus’s role. Throughout the play the god wanders from place to place,
engendering violence and crime with the artfulness of a satanic seducer.
Only the quixotic masochism of our own age, the result of a long immun-
ity to the violence that threatens primitive societies, allows us to see
anything attractive in the Dionysus of The Bacchae. It seems clear that
Euripides shares none of our illusions, which would be comic if they were
less disquieting.

The god has no proper being outside the realm of violence. AII his
attributes are linked to violence; if he is associated with the gift of proph-
etic inspiration (like the Delphic Apollo who figures in the Oedipus
myth), it is because prophetic inspiration is part of the sacrificial crisis.
And if he later appears as the god of wine, that is probably a more sedate
version of his original designation as the god of homicidal fury. Certainly
there is nothing in the ancient Dionysiac tradition that alludes directly to
viniculture or the production of wine.‘ In The Bacchae the epiphany of the
god arises from the catastrophic consequences of the sacrificial crisis,
which is symbolized by the destruction of Pentheus’s palace:

Chorus: Divine tremor, shake the floor of the earth!
Dionysus: See! The palace of Pentheus trembles. It falls! Dionysus is standing
there! Bow down before him!

Chorus: We bow down before him. Ah, see the marble friezes fall! Bromios will
shout with triumph within!

Dionysus: Let divine lightning be the torch! Now set afire the ruins of Pen-
theus’s palace.

Chorus: Ah, ah! Look, look! Around the sacred tomb of Semele the ever-
smouldering fire leaps in flame! Prostrate yourselves before your god, O
Maenads. The palace falls! He is coming, the son of Zeus!

It may seem surprising, even scandalous, that the incarnation of the
most terrible forms of violence should be an object of veneration as well as
of fear. In this case, however, it is not the worshipers who are naive, but
the bewildered observers.

If we examine more closely the specific types of violence associated
with the god, we find that an overall pattern appears. This pattern seems
to confirm our interpretation of Pentheus’s murder as a Dionysiac sacrifice.
Under the name of Bromios—the Noisemaker, the Earthshaker—Dionysus
presides over disasters that have nothing to do with the thunderstorms
and earthquakes beloved of nineteenth-century scholars but that in fact
always involve a mob impelled by sheer panic to the performance of
extraordinary acts. Tiresias defines Dionysus as the god of mob hysteria, of
sudden onslaughts of collective fear: “Soldiers in full battle array and
poised for combat are transfixed by panic before a lance has touched
them. This hysteria is Dionysus’s work.”

Such statements, added to the ones we have already collected and to
the body of evidence drawn from other rites, leads to the inescapable
conclusion that Dionysus is the god of decisive mob action. Once stated, it
should be easy to see why such a god is called for and why he is revered.
He claims legitimacy not from his ability to disturb the peace but from his
ability to restore the peace he has himself disturbed—thereby justifying, a
posteriori, having disturbed it in the first place. Divine intervention is
transformed into legitimate anger against a blasphemous hubris, which,
until the crucial display of unanimity, seemed to implicate the god
himself.

Textual criticism confirms the theories that portray the Dionysiac cult as
a consequence of major political and social upheavals. In spite of its limita-
tions, a work like Erwin Rohde’s Psyche manifests a profound intuitive
grasp of reality. In the absence of new documentary evidence the trad-
itional historical method can make little progress. Only a comparative
analysis of texts and of significant religious phenomena (a method utilized
by Rohde, but on too small a scale) can substantially increase our
knowledge.”

Along with any known historical context, we can infer behind a myth
like that of The Bacchae a sudden outbreak of violence so extreme as to
threaten the very existence of the community. This threat will eventually
be withdrawn, as rapidly as it appeared, thanks to a type of mob violence
that reconciles all members of the community because it involves the
participation of all. The metamorphosis from peaceable citizens into
raging beasts is too terrifying and too transitory for the community to
accept it as issuing from within itself. As soon as calm has been miracu-
lously restored, the past tumult will be looked upon as a supreme example
of divine intervention. Angered at discovering himself ignored or mis-
represented, a god has made known his wishes in a thoroughly godlike
manner. Having accepted a final victim, a victim of his own choice in
which he may also be incarnated, he silently withdraws from the scene.
He will be as benevolent from afar as he was terrible in propinquity.

Religion, then, is far from “useless.” It humanizes violence; it protects
man from his own violence by taking it out of his hands, transforming it
into a transcendent and ever-present danger to be kept in check by the
appropriate rites appropriately observed and by a modest and prudent
demeanor. Religious misinterpretation is a truly constructive force, for it
purges man of the suspicions that would poison his existence if he were to
remain conscious of the crisis as it actually took place.

To think religiously is to envision the city’s destiny in terms of that
violence whose mastery over man increases as man believes he has gained
mastery over it. To think religiously (in the primitive sense) is to see
violence as something superhuman, to be kept always at a distance and
ultimately renounced. When the fearful adoration of this power begins to
diminish and all distinctions begin to disappear, the ritual sacrifices lose
their force; their potency is no longer recognized by the entire com-
munity. Each member tries to correct the situation individually, and none
succeeds. The withering away of the transcendental influence means that
there is no longer the slightest difference between a desire to save the city
and unbridled ambition, between genuine piety and the desire to claim
divine status for oneself. Everyone looks on a rival enterprise as evidence
of blasphemous designs. (It was at such a moment that all the distinctions
between Dionysus and Pentheus were effaced.) Men set to quarreling
about the gods, and their skepticism leads to a new sacrificial crisis that
will appear—retrospectively, in the light of a new manifestation of
unanimous violence—as a new act of divine intervention and divine
revenge.

Men would not be able to shake loose the violence between them, to
make of it a separate entity both sovereign and redemptory, without the
surrogate victim. Also, violence itself offers a sort of respite, the fresh
beginning of a cycle of ritual after a cycle of violence. Violence will come
to an end only after it has had the last word and that word has been
accepted as divine. The meaning of this word must remain hidden, the
mechanism of unanimity remain concealed. For religion protects man as
long as its ultimate foundations are not revealed. To drive the monster
from its secret lair is to risk loosing it on mankind. To remove men’s
ignorance is only to risk exposing them to an even greater peril. The only
barrier against human violence is raised on misconception. In fact, the
sacrificial crisis is simply another form of that knowledge which grows
greater as the reciprocal violence grows more intense but which never
leads to the whole truth. It is the knowledge of violence, along with the
violence itself, that the act of expulsion succeeds in shunting outside the
realm of consciousness. From the very fact that it belies the overt mytho-
logical messages, tragic drama opens a vast abyss before the poet; but he
always draws back at the last moment. He is exposed to a form of hubris
more dangerous than any contracted by his characters; it has to do with a
truth that is felt to be infinitely destructive, even if it is not fully under-
stood—and its destructiveness is as obvious to ancient religious thought as
it is to modern philosophers. Thus, we are dealing with an interdiction
that still applies to ourselves and that modern thought has not yet invali-
dated. The fact that this secret has been subjected to exceptional pressure
in the play must prompt the following lines:

May our thoughts never aspire to anything higher than the laws! What does it
cost man to acknowledge the full sovereignty of the gods? That which has
always been held as true owes its strength to Nature.

For Dionysus as for Oedipus, the mythic elaboration, the transfiguring
medium of the story, leads to the reorganization of certain elements that
properly pertain to collective phenomena anterior to the myth, elements
that would be wholly unsuitable, even unintelligible, if they were evenly
distributed among the characters; if, that is, the reciprocal nature of
the violence were duly acknowledged. In both cases reciprocity yields to
difference, and this difference severs the god or mythic hero from the
community, while drawing to him all the community’s violent impulses.
Henceforth the role of violence in the crisis—in addition to its function
in purely ritualistic or sacrificial terms—will be recalled solely as that of
a passive agent of contagion: the plague in the Oedipus myth, or the
fraternal nondifferentiation, or the Dionysiac bacchanal.

All the elements that enter into the composition of the myth are
borrowed from the reality of the crisis; nothing has been added, nothing
taken away; no conscious alterations have been made. Mythological
elaboration is an unconscious process based on the surrogate victim and
nourished by the presence of violence. This presence is not “repressed,”
not cast off on the unconscious; rather, it is detached from man and made
divine.

Tragic inspiration dissolves fictive differences in reciprocal violence; it
demystifies the double illusion of a violent divinity and an innocent
community. The mixed choruses at the festivals of Dionysus and the tem-
porary permission granted women to drink wine are faint echoes of a
more awesome type of intoxication. Tragic inspiration demystifies the
bacchanal; consequently, it destroys the delusion based on the collective
transference upon which a major portion of the rite depends. The rite is
not oriented toward violence, but toward peace. The tragic demystifica-
tion discloses a bacchanal that is pure frenzy, naked violence. And the
process of tragic demystification is itself violent, for it cannot but weaken
the rites and contribute to their “going wrong.” Far from toiling in the
cause of peace and universal understanding, as a world blind to the social
role of human violence likes to believe, anti-religious demystification is
every bit as ambiguous as religion itself. If it takes up arms against a
certain type of violence, it may well bring about another, undoubtedly
more destructive type. Unlike the moderns, Euripides confronts this
ambiguity head on, and that is why he never advances in one direction
without subsequently retracing his steps in another. In his oscillations
between “audacity” and “timidity,” he appears to be alternately defending
and denouncing the bacchanal. At the beginning of the play the bacchanal
is presented in a favorable light by Cadmus and Tiresias, who both make
speeches in praise of Dionysus. Euripides seems anxious to defend the cult
against those who would associate Dionysiac nondifferentiation with
promiscuity and violence. The bacchantes are presented as models of
tranquillity and decorum, and the hostile aspersions cast on the cult are
indignantly rejected by the poet.

The defense of the bacchantes, however, is immediately belied by
events. As Marie Delcourt-Curvers remarks in her introduction to the
play, we wonder “what meaning the poet intended to give to the antics of
Agaué and her companions—innocent at first (to the point of seeming
slightly ridiculous), then disquieting, and finally murderous; so that hav-
ing doubted the very existence of a ‘problem of The Bacchae,’ we are forced
to acknowledge both the problem and our inability to resolve it.”®

The rite may stem from violence and be steeped in violence, but it still
aspires to peace. In fact, it is a means of promoting harmony between
the members of the community. Euripides tried to save the rite from the
destruction visited on all religious concepts by sacrificial crises and the
tragic mode. But this effort was doomed to failure: the poet’s tragic inspir-
ation all too easily overcame his good intentions; and once the sacrificial
and nonsacrificial have been mixed—like the two drops of Gorgon’s
blood—there is no separating them.

The “problem of The Bacchae” would never have arisen if Euripides had
fully acceded to the violent origin of the rite, the playing out of violence,
and had acknowledged the generative act of unanimity preserved by the
rite, lost in the onslaught of reciprocal violence and recovered through the
mechanism of the surrogate victim. He could then have demonstrated
that the good and bad aspects of the bacchanal correspond to the two faces
of the generative act. The same creatures who are at each others’ throats
during the course of a sacrificial crisis are fully capable of coexisting,
before and after the crisis, in the relative harmony of a ritualistic order.

Indeed, there would have been no problem if Euripides had been able
to adopt the perspective of primitive religion, openly espousing the sacred
while stripping man of his violence and reattributing it to divine influ-
ences. Again, there would have been no “problem of The Bacchae” if the
play had been able to bring his perplexities to rest with one of the inter-
mediate positions between the two extremes of the religious solution,
which transfers the whole burden of violence to the divinity, and the
unadorned truth, which passes the violence back to man.

In this intermediate system, which is the system of modern man, the
opposition between violent disjunction and peaceful harmony—a differ-
ence that should unfold in the course of time, as a diachronic process—is
transmuted into a synchronic difference. We enter a universe populated
by “good” and “evil” influences—the only universe in which we feel truly
at home.

Such a universe is adumbrated in The Bacchae. All the elements of its
establishment are there: the concept of an “impious revolt” against the
gods; the partitioning of the god’s retinue into “authentic” (Lydian) and
“inauthentic (Theban) maenads. However, at the core of the tragic action
all distinctions between a ‘good’ and a ‘bad’ Dionysiac possession—
between enthusiasm rewarded as a prize to the faithful and enthusiasm
meted out as a punishment to the wicked—are effaced. The Manichaean
division between good and evil is no sooner proposed than it vanishes
from sight.

This division, it should be noted, is reflected in the continuing hunt fora
scapegoat on the cultural and ideological level, a hunt that has gone on
long after Pentheus met his fate on the slopes of Mount Cithaeron.

To resolve the problem of The Bacchae, we would need to establish a
system of differentiation that did not dissolve under scrutiny and that
permitted us to affirm the play’s literary, psychological, and moral coher-
ence. Such a system would be based, once again, on recourse to arbitrary
violence.

The foundations of The Bacchae have not been uncovered, but they have
been soundly shaken. It is not Euripides’ “psychological” approach that is
ultimately responsible for the incoherence of the tragedy, its oscillation
between “audacity” and “timidity.” Rather, it is the “shaking of degrees,”
which Euripides cannot and will not explicitly acknowledge but which
blunts all distinctions and multiplies all meanings, allowing none of them
to remain unshaken.

The tragedy never succeeds in finding its equilibrium; but then, there
is no place for equilibrium in the drama. It is from this that the play’s
fertile incoherence stems—an incoherence very different from the ster-
ile coherence of lesser works of art, “intellectually” and “esthetically”
beyond reproach. There is no point in trying to resolve the “problem of
The Bacchae,” any more than there is in trying to resolve the opposition
between the symmetry of the tragic action and the dissymetry of the
mythological message in Oedipus the King. Ultimately these two prob-
lems are one. Instead of trying to force tragedy to conform to our trivial
and insignificant criterion of coherence, we should concentrate on the
logical flaws of tragedy and try to penetrate the inviolate interiors of
the myths, to see how they are put together. We must generalize the
problem of The Bacchae so that it applies to all cultures—religious and
nonreligious, primitive and nonprimitive. Our problem then will relate
to culture’s violent origins, previously hidden but now discernible in
the rapid disintegration of the last sacrificial practices of the modern
world.

The preponderance of women in the Dionysiac cult remains a subject of
conjecture. We may well wonder, without retracting any of our previous
suppositions, whether the charges brought against the women—their
responsibility for Pentheus’s murder, the homicidal frenzy that character-
izes their behavior throughout the original bacchanal (that is, throughout
the sacrificial crisis)—are not every bit as false as the idyllic portrait of the
bacchanal, at the beginning of the play, as a rustic interlude amid the
flowers and forests of Cithaeron.

The two protagonists are male, but behind them there are only women
and old men. Homicidal fury is very real during the crisis, but it pertains to
the entire community; the violence directed against the surrogate victim
cannot be limited strictly to the women. We may therefore wonder
whether the preponderance of women does not constitute a secondary
mythological displacement, an effort to exonerate from the accusation of
violence, not mankind as a whole, but adult males, who have the greatest
need to forget their role in the crisis because, in fact, they must have been
largely responsible for it. They alone risk plunging the community into
the chaos of reciprocal violence.

We can therefore postulate a mythological substitution of women for
men in regard to violence. That is not to say that the women’s link to
Mount Cithaeron was pure invention. Myths invent nothing; but the true
meaning of this mass migration of women, accompanied by their children
and perhaps by old men, may well have been as badly distorted by the
tragic handling as by pastoral idealizing. We are told that the exodus from
the city was prompted by divine inspiration and Dionysiac enthusiasm.
Thus, exodus becomes a characteristic trait of the crisis, but it is neither a
triumphal procession nor an irresistible charge. Rather, it is likely to have
been a frantic flight of those members of the community whose age or sex
prevented them from bearing arms. The weaker leave the field to the
stronger, who spread terror throughout the city.

Anthropological evidence seems to support this hypothesis. Napoleon
Chagnon describes a festival organized by a number of closely related
Yanomamé communities. The program of entertainment included a series
of “chest pounding duels,” ostensibly of friendly intent and traditional to
the occasion. At the moment when the imminent defeat of one team
threatened to turn the contest into a bloody battle, “the women and
children began to cry, knowing that the situation was getting serious, and
they grouped into the farthest corners of their houses near the exits.”
Shortly after, while the warriors of both factions were preparing for
combat and gathering their poisoned arrows, “the women and children
... began fleeing from the village, screaming and wailing.””

The role played by women in the religious and cultural structure of a
society—or rather, the minor importance of that role—is graphically
illustrated by the social framework prevailing in certain South American
villages—in those of Bororo, for example.* The village is laid out in the
form of an almost perfect circle, divided up according to social categories.
In the center is the men’s house; entrance is forbidden to women. Cul-
tural and religious activities consist for the main part of a complex system
of comings and goings confined entirely to the men, with the central
house serving as a sort of general meeting place. The women inhabit the
houses on the periphery of the circle and unlike the men, they never
move to another house. This immobility of the women was one of the
factors that led early researchers to affirm the existence of a “matriarchy.”
In fact, far from attesting to women’s importance, this very stability sug-
gests that women are only passive spectators at a masculine tragicomedy.
The elegant dance ritual practiced by the men in time of order and tran-
quillity amounts to a precautionary measure designed to prevent the vio-
lent encounters that occur in times of turbulence. The physical structure
of the Bororo village seems to reflect the centrifugal inclinations of its
weakest inhabitants, the women, by making the center an exclusively
masculine preserve. This inclination is universal; it was observed by
Chagnon in its most literal form during the Yanomamé festival, and it can
be surmised behind the less convincing aspects of the Dionysus myth.

The motionless groups of women, gathered together in the peripheral
houses, bring powerfully to mind the people who cluster on side-walks or
at street corners whenever “something is going on—” usually some dis-
pute or brawl. The desire not to miss any part of the show balanced by the
desire to remain at a safe distance from the action causes the spectators to
form themselves into a circle around the object of interest. Psychoanalysts
will note, of course, that the men’s house has been inserted like a phallus
in the feminine circle; but this observation scarcely helps to explain the
situation. Beyond the sexual symbolism is the violence that gives shape to
the events and that literally inscribes itself—first as a cultural order, then
as sexuality hidden behind that order, and finally and openly as violence,
which underlies all possible meanings and remains indecipherable as long
as any other meaning overlays it.

Returning to the subject of Dionysus, we repeat that the presence of the
women outside the city might well represent a real circumstance of the
original crisis, transfigured by a mythological operation analogous to, but
distinct from, the one we have already analyzed. A transfer of violence
can be assumed, parallel to the one that engenders the god but of less
consequence. We are dealing here with a mythological elaboration that
probably took place early, at an epoch when the divinity had not yet
absorbed the most violent and repulsive aspects of the sacrificial crisis. The
characteristic features of the crisis are not yet sufficiently blurred and
indistinct for men to be willing to acknowledge them as their own.

The tendency to attribute to women what is probably a masculine trait
of violence can be related to a major thematic motif of The Bacchae: the loss
of sexual differentiation. As we have remarked, one of the effects of the
sacrificial crisis is a certain feminization of the men, accompanied by a
masculinization of the women. For the idea that men behave like women
and women like men is substituted the idea that the sinister Dionysiac
practices are almost exclusively women’s work. The abolishment of sex-
ual differences—for that matter, of all differences—is a reciprocal phe-
nomenon, and the mythological redistribution has been carried out, as
always, at the expense of reciprocity. The symmetrical elements regroup
under a nonsymmetrical form; a form reassuring to male dignity and
authority, for it grants what amounts to a virtual monopoly on Dionysiac
delirium to the women.

Here again tragedy restores lost reciprocity, but only partially; it
does not dare challenge the dominant feminine role in the origins of the
Dionysiac rites. And if the lost sexual difference makes it easier to shunt
the responsibility for violence onto the women, it still cannot explain
away the necessity for violence. Like the animal and the infant, but to a
lesser degree, the woman qualifies for sacrificial status by reason of her
weakness and relatively marginal social status. That is why she can be
viewed as a quasi-sacred figure, both desired and disdained, alternately
elevated and abused. A reading of Greek mythology and tragedy (espe-
cially the plays of Euripides) with particular attention to the possible
inversion of the sexes would undoubtedly yield some striking results.

Notes

1 Roger Caillois, Man and the Sacred, trans. Meyer Barash (Glencoe, IIl., 1959),
chap. 4, pp. 97-127.
2 Henry, Jungle People, pp. 56-57.

The best treatment of the crowd’s role in abolishing differences is Elias
Canetti’s Crowds and Power, trans. Carol Stewart (New York, 1966).

Cf. Henri Jeanmaire, Dionysos: Histoire du culte de Bacchus (Paris, 1970), p. 23.
Erwin Rohde, Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks,
trans. W. B. Hillis from the 8th ed. (London and New York, 1925). In his
remarkable Dionysos, Jeanmaire offers a critical appraisal of the sociological
approach. His thesis, which emphasizes ecstatic aspects of the cult and
the signs of possession, can be reconciled with an awareness of social
and historical aspects through my hypothesis of the sacrificial crisis and
unanimous generative violence.

Euripide, ed. and trans. Marie Delcourt-Curvers (Paris, 1962).

Napoleon Chagnon, Yanomam#d, the Fierce People (New York, 1968), p. 116.

Cf. Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, trans. John Weightman and Doreen
Weightman (New York, 1975), chap. 22.



From Mimetic Desire to the Monstrous Double


In The Bacchae the intervention of the god coincides with the loss of
generative unanimity and the inevitable slide into reciprocal violence.
When the transcendental element descends to the human sphere it is
reduced to immanence, transformed back into mimetic fascination.
Reciprocal violence now demolishes everything that unanimous violence
had erected. And as the institutions and interdictions based on generative
unanimity perish, violence roams at will, unchallenged and unchecked.
The god who has appeared malleable and complaisant, a willing servant of
mankind, always manages to slip away at the last moment, leaving
destruction in his wake. Then the men who sought to bend him to their
uses turn on one another with murderous intent.

In Oedipus the King the tragic conflict still centers, at least in appearance,
on specific concerns: the throne of Thebes and the queen who is both
mother and wife. In The Bacchae, by contrast, Dionysus and Pentheus have
nothing concrete to fight over. Their rivalry centers on divinity itself; but
behind that divinity there lies only violence. To compete for divinity is to
compete for a chimera, because the reality of the divine rests in its tran-
scendental absence. It is not the hysterical rivalry of men that will
engender gods—only unanimous violence can accomplish that. Insofar as
divinity is real, it cannot serve as a prize to be won in a contest. Insofar as
it is regarded as a prize, it is merely a phantom that will invariably escape
man’s grasp and turn to violence.

Every tragic protagonist is fated to pursue this phantom. And as soon as
one individual attempts to incarnate divine violence, rivalries spring
up. The violence remains reciprocal; there is no profit to anyone when
only blows are traded. The chorus perceives the train of events and
scrupulously avoids involving itself in the tragic action.

We must take care not to view the tragic conflict in terms of its immedi-
ate goals, even when they are objects of such consequence as a throne or a
queen. The Bacchae teaches us that we must invert the usual order of
things in order to appreciate the import of tragic rivalry. In the traditional
view the object comes first, followed by human desires that converge
independently on this object. Last of all comes violence, a fortuitous con-
sequence of the convergence. As the sacrificial conflict increases in inten-
sity, so too does the violence. It is no longer the intrinsic value of the
object that inspires the struggle; rather, it is the violence itself that bestows
value on the objects, which are only pretexts for a conflict. From this point
on it is violence that calls the tune. Violence is the divine force that every-
one tries to use for his own purposes and that ends by using everyone for
its own—the Dionysus of The Bacchae.

In the light of this knowledge even the preliminary stages of the
sacrificial crisis can be seen to reveal the dominant influence of violence.
Certain scenes of Oedipus the King, while less explicit in their violence than
those of The Bacchae, gain intensity and significance when viewed with the
lessons of The Bacchae in mind. When Oedipus and Laius meet at the
crossroads, the father/son and king/subject relationship is not initially in
question. Their encounter begins with a stranger’s menacing gesture, the
older man barring the road to the younger one. Oedipus’s reaction is to
strike out at the stranger then at his throne, then at his wife; that is, to
strike at the objects belonging to the initiator of violence. Only in the end
is the aggressor identified as father and king. In other words, it is violence
that bestows value on the violent man’s possessions. Laius is not violent
because he is a father; rather, it is because of his violence that he passes as
a father and a king. Is that not what Heraclitus had in mind when he
proclaimed that “violence is the father and king of all”?

Nothing, perhaps, could be more banal than the role of violence in
awakening desire. Our modern terms for this phenomenon are sadism or
masochism, depending on its manifestations; we regard it as a pathological
deviation from the norm. We believe that the normal form of desire is
nonviolent and that this nonviolent form is characteristic of the generality
of mankind.

But if the sacrificial crisis is a universal phenomenon, this hopeful belief
is clearly without foundation. At the very height of the crisis violence
becomes simultaneously the instrument, object, and all-inclusive subject
of desire. This is why social coexistence would be impossible if no surro-
gate victim existed, if violence persisted beyond a certain threshold and
failed to be transmuted into culture. It is only at this point that the vicious
circle of reciprocal violence, wholly destructive in nature, is replaced by
the vicious circle of ritual violence, creative and protective in nature.

At the height of the sacrificial crisis man’s desires are focused on one
thing only: violence. And in one way or another violence is always min-
gled with desire. The statement that violence is “instinctive” adds nothing
to our understanding of this strange and startling relationship; on the
contrary, it only clouds the issue. Today we know that animals possess
individual braking mechanisms to insure that combats between them
seldom result in the actual death of the vanquished. Because such mech-
anisms tend to assure the perpetuation of the species, it would perhaps be
not inappropriate to term them instinctive. To use the same term in connec-
tion with man’s lack of such a braking device, however, would be absurd.

The notion of an instinct (or if one prefers, an impulse) that propels
men toward violence or death—Freud’s famous “death wish”—is no more
than a last surrender to mythological thinking, a final manifestation of
that ancient belief that human violence can be attributed to some outside
influence—to gods, to Fate, to some force men can hardly be expected to
control. Once again, it is a mode of thought that refuses to confront
human conflicts squarely. It is an act of evasion, an attempt to “pass the
buck” and find an alternate sacrificial solution in a situation which makes
such a solution increasingly difficult.

In the midst of the sacrificial crisis there is no point in attaching desire to
any one object, no matter how attractive, for desire is wholly directed
toward violence itself. This does not mean, however, that we must endow
man with an instinctive drive toward death or violence. There is still
another approach open to us.

In all the varieties of desire examined by us, we have encountered not
only a subject and an object but a third presence as well: the rival. It is the
rival who should be accorded the dominant role. We must take care,
however, to identify him correctly; not to say, with Freud, that he is the
father; or, in the case of the tragedies, that he is the brother. Our first task
is to define the rival’s position within the system to which he belongs, in
relation to both subject and object. The rival desires the same object as the
subject, and to assert the primacy of the rival can lead to only one conclu-
sion. Rivalry does not arise because of the fortuitous convergence of two
desires on a single object; rather, the subject desires the object because the rival
desires it. In desiring an object the rival alerts the subject to the desirability
of the object. The rival, then, serves as a model for the subject, not only in
regard to such secondary matters as style and opinions but also, and more
essentially, in regard to desires.

When modern theorists envisage man as a being who knows what he
wants, or who at least possesses an “unconscious” that knows for him,
they may simply have failed to perceive the domain in which human
uncertainty is most extreme. Once his basic needs are satisfied (indeed,
sometimes even before), man is subject to intense desires, though he may
not know precisely for what. The reason is that he desires being, some-
thing he himself lacks and which some other person seems to possess. The
subject thus looks to that other person to inform him of what he should
desire in order to acquire that being. If the model, who is apparently
already endowed with superior being, desires some object, the object
must surely be capable of conferring an even greater plenitude of being. It
is not through words, therefore, but by the example of his own desire that
the model conveys to the subject the supreme desirability of the object.

We find ourselves reverting to an ancient notion—mimesis—one
whose conflictual implications have always been misunderstood. We
must understand that desire itself is essentially mimetic, directed toward
an object desired by the model.

The mimetic quality of childhood desire is universally recognized. Adult
desire is virtually identical, except that (most strikingly in our own cul-
ture) the adult is generally ashamed to imitate others for fear of revealing
his lack of being. The adult likes to assert his independence and to offer
himself as a model to others; he invariably falls back on the formula,
“Imitate me!” in order to conceal his own lack of originality.

Two desires converging on the same object are bound to clash. Thus,
mimesis coupled with desire leads automatically to conflict. However,
men always seem half blind to this conjunction, unable to perceive it as a
cause of rivalry. In human relationships words like sameness and similarity
evoke an image of harmony. If we have the same tastes and like the same
things, surely we are bound to get along. But what will happen when we
share the same desires? Only the major dramatists and novelists have
partly understood and explored this form of rivalry.’ Even Freud treated it
in an indirect and distorted fashion, as we shall see in the next chapter.

By a strange but explicable consequence of their relationship, neither
the model nor the disciple is disposed to acknowledge the inevitable
rivalry. The model, even when he has openly encouraged imitation, is
surprised to find himself engaged in competition. He concludes that the
disciple has betrayed his confidence by following in his footsteps. As for
the disciple, he feels both rejected and humiliated, judged unworthy by
his model of participating in the superior existence the model himself
enjoys.

The reason for these misunderstandings is not hard to grasp. The model
considers himself too far above the disciple, the disciple considers himself
too far below the model, for either of them even fleetingly to entertain the
notion that their desires are identical—in short, that they might indeed be
rivals. To make the reciprocity complete, we need only add that the dis-
ciple can also serve as a model, even to his own model. As for the model,
no matter how self-sufficient he may appear, he invariably assumes the
role of disciple, either in this context or another. From all indications, only
the role of disciple is truly essential—it is this role that must be invoked to
define the basic human condition.

The mimetic aspects of desire must correspond to a primary impulse of
most living creatures, exacerbated in man to the point where only cultural
constraints can channel it in constructive directions. Man cannot respond
to that universal human injunction, “Imitate me!” without almost
immediately encountering an inexplicable counterorder: “Don’t imitate
me!” (which really means, “Do not appropriate my object”). This second
command fills man with despair and turns him into the slave of an
involuntary tyrant. Man and his desires thus perpetually transmit contra-
dictory signals to one another. Neither model nor disciple really under-
stands why one constantly thwarts the other because neither perceives
that his desire has become the reflection of the other’s. Far from being
restricted to a limited number of pathological cases, as American theoreti-
cians suggest, the double bind—a contradictory double imperative, or
rather a whole network of contradictory imperatives—is an extremely
common phenomenon. In fact, it is so common that it might be said to
form the basis of all human relationships.’

Bateson is undoubtedly correct in believing that the effects of the
double bind on the child are particularly devastating. All the grown-up
voices around him, beginning with those of the father and mother (voices
which, in our society at least, speak for the culture with the force
of established authority) exclaim in a variety of accents, “Imitate us!”
“Imitate me!” “I bear the secret of life, of true being!” The more attentive
the child is to these seductive words, and the more earnestly he responds
to the suggestions emanating from all sides, the more devastating will be
the eventual conflicts. The child possesses no perspective that will allow
him to see things as they are. He has no basis for reasoned judgements, no
means of foreseeing the metamorphosis of his model into a rival. This
model’s opposition reverberates in his mind like a terrible condemnation;
he can only regard it as an act of excommunication. The future orienta-
tion of his desires—that is, the choice of his future models—will be signifi-
cantly affected by the dichotomies of his childhood. In fact, these models
will determine the shape of his personality.

If desire is allowed to follow its own bent, its mimetic nature will almost
always lead it into a double bind. The unchanneled mimetic impulse hurls
itself blindly against the obstacle of a conflicting desire. It invites its own
rebuffs, and these rebuffs will in turn strengthen the mimetic inclination.
We have, then, a self-perpetuating process, constantly increasing in sim-
plicity and fervor. Whenever the disciple borrows from his model what he
believes to be the “true” object, he tries to possess that truth by desiring
precisely what this model desires. Whenever he sees himself closest to the
supreme goal, he comes into violent conflict with a rival. By a mental
shortcut that is both eminently logical and self-defeating, he convinces
himself that the violence itself is the most distinctive attribute of this
supreme goal! Ever afterward, violence and desire will be linked in his
mind, and the presence of violence will invariably awaken desire. Perhaps
this is why the possessions that serve to symbolize being in Oedipus the
King—the throne and the queen—are behind the stranger’s angry gesture
at the crossroads. Violence is the father and king of everything! Jocasta affirms
this truth in declaring that Oedipus belongs to whomever speaks to him of
“phobou”—of unhappiness, terror, disasters, nefarious violence of any sort. The
oracular pronouncements of Laius, Creon, and Tiresias and the ill tidings of
the messengers emanate from that logos phobou to which all the characters
in the myth belong. The logos phobou is ultimately the wordless language by
which mimetic desire and violence communicate with one another.

Violent opposition, then, is the signifier of ultimate desire, of divine
self-sufficiency, of that “beautiful totality” whose beauty depends on its
being inaccessible and impenetrable. The victim of this violence both
adores and detests it. He strives to master it by means of a mimetic coun-
terviolence and measures his own stature in proportion to his failure. If
by chance, however, he actually succeeds in asserting his mastery over
the model, the latter’s prestige vanishes. He must then turn to an even
greater violence and seek out an obstacle that promises to be truly
insurmountable.

Mimetic desire is simply a term more comprehensive than violence for
religious pollution. As the catalyst for the sacrificial crisis, it would even-
tually destroy the entire community if the surrogate victim were not at
hand to halt the process and the ritualized mimesis were not at hand to
keep the conflictual mimesis from beginning afresh. As I have already
indicated (a little later on I will formally examine the evidence), there
are all sorts of rules and regulations that prevent desire from floating free
and attaching itself to the first model that comes along. By channeling its
energies into ritual forms and activities sanctioned by ritual, the cultural
order prevents multiple desires from converging on the same object.
Notably, it protects children from the disastrous effects of the double
bind.

As the reader may recall, I have tried to demonstrate that the characters
in tragedy are ultimately indistinguishable. The words used to describe
any one of them in psychological, sociological, moral, or even religious
terms—for example, “hot-tempered,” “tyrannical,” “hubristic’—are all
equally applicable and equally inadequate. If the commentators have
failed to remark that these traits are the common property of all the char-
acters in the play, it is because they are not all affected by them at the same
time. Anger, for example, is always transitory. It comes in fits, emerging
from a background of tranquillity—which is why it is always referred to as
sudden and unexpected. Tyranny, too, is essentially unstable. Anewcomer
can ascend unexpectedly to the very summit of power, only to plummet,
while one of his opponents assumes his lost position. In short, there is
always a tyrant and always an oppressed, but the roles alternate. There is
always one character who is angry; but while one of the enemy brothers
rants and rages, the other may temporarily regain his composure.

In tragedy everything alternates. But we must also reckon with the
irresistible tendency of the human spirit to suspend this oscillation, to fix
attention on one extreme or the other. This tendency is, strictly speaking,
mythological in nature. It is responsible for the pseudo-determination of
the protagonists, which in turn transforms revolving oppositions into
stable differences.

The concept of alternation appears in tragedy, but it figures there
deprived of its reciprocity. Paradoxically, it becomes a pseudo-
specification; it is presented as the characteristic attitude of a single indi-
vidual in the play. Oedipus, for instance, proclaims himself the child of
Fortune and of Chance. (We moderns would be inclined to use the word
destiny, which lends an air of solemnity and “individuality” to the situation,
and avoids any hint of reciprocity.)

The hold of Fortune (fukhe) on Oedipus is manifested in a series of
“highs” and “lows.” “Fortune was my mother, and the years that tracked
my life saw me in turn both great and small.” In the final lines of the play
the chorus defines the hero’s existence in terms of his peripeteiai, his
reversals of fortune; that is, in terms, once again, of alternation. (It
matters little whether these lines were or were not written by Sophocles.)

The definition is correct, but it is no more correct for Oedipus than for
any other tragic hero. That is apparent if we turn our attention from a
single play to the whole corpus of tragedy. If the tragic heroes are all
compared, their distinctive traits vanish, for they all successively assume
the same roles. Oedipus is an oppressor in Oedipus the King but the
oppressed in Oedipus at Colonus; Creon is oppressed in Oedipus the King but
becomes the oppressor in Antigone. Nobody, in short, incarnates the true
oppressor or the true oppressed; and the modern ideological interpret-
ations seriously misconstrue the tragic spirit. They relegate the plays to
the company of romantic melodrama or American Westerns. A static
Manichaean confrontation of “good guys” and “bad guys,” an unyielding
rancor that holds fast to its victims, has replaced the revolving oppositions
of real tragedy and completely overshadowed the concept of the tragic
peripeteia.

Tragedy is interested in reversal as such; it cares little for the domains
these reversals happen to affect. Oedipus’s alternating states of anger
and serenity, for example, contribute no less to his portrait as a child of
Fortune than do his alternating periods of exile and kingship. The differ-
ent rhythm of these alternations and the disparity between the realms to
which they belong are such that we would scarcely think of connecting
the two; indeed, as far as I know traditional criticism has never attempted
to do so. Yet once our attention has been drawn to the subject we
may suspect that every motif in tragedy is governed by an alternating
movement, and our suspicion is confirmed by close examination.

It is clear that alternation constitutes a relationship. In fact, alternation is
a fundamental fact of the tragic relationship—which is why it can scarcely
be considered characteristic of any single individual. At first glance the
alternation of tragedy may well seem dependent on the object under dis-
pute by the enemy brothers. The object itself seems of such importance
that its loss of possession entails a radical reversal of status, a passage from
being to nothingness or from nothingness to being. Such is the case for
Eteocles and Polyneices, who decide to take turns wielding the power
they are incapable of dividing between them. When Eteocles is king,
Polyneices is one of his subjects, and vice versa.

However, this alternation of objects has little direct connection with
tragic action. The rhythm of the action is faster and more abrupt; it is
reflected in the tragic dialogue or stichomythia, that is, in the exchange of
insults and accusations that corresponds to the exchange of blows
between warriors locked in single combat. As we have noticed, the
description of the duel between Eteocles and Polyneices in The Phoenician
Women takes the place of a tragic dialogue and plays an identical role.

Whether the violence is physical or verbal, an interval of time passes
between each blow. And each blow is delivered in the hope that it will
bring the duel or dialogue to an end, constitute the coup de grace or final
word. The recipient of the blow is thrown momentarily off balance and
needs time to pull himself together, to prepare a suitable reply. During this
interval his adversary may well believe that the decisive blow has indeed
been struck. Victory—or rather, the act of violence that permits no
response—thus oscillates between the combatants, without either man-
aging to lay final claim to it. Only an act of collective expulsion can bring
this oscillation to a halt and cast violence outside the community.

Desire, as we have seen, is attracted to violence triumphant and strives
desperately to incarnate this “irresistible” force. Desire clings to violence
and stalks it like a shadow because violence is the signifier of the cherished
being, the signifier of divinity.

If unanimous violence alone (that is, violence that spends itself) can
properly be regarded as generative, all the implications it makes manifest
and all the differences it succeeds in establishing are intimately associated
with the back-and-forth antagonism that precedes, with the oscillation of
victory from one combatant to another throughout the sacrificial crisis.
The fits of vertigo that attend the process stem from this terrible oscillation,
and they ultimately engulf all perceived reality. Everything oscillates with
a violence that seems to favor first one, then another individual or faction.
Whatever an initial act of violence seems to settle is invariably subverted
by a second act, which reorders everything anew. As long as violence
remains present among men, and as long as men pursue it as an absolute,
as a kind of divinity, it will continue its devastating oscillations.

Euripides’ Bacchae offers the clue. The idea of a contest in which div-
inity is the prize, passing from one contestant to the other with uni-
formly disastrous results, is essential to an understanding of all tragic
motifs, for the structuring of these motifs is really patterned on the
action. The reader may protest that we are dealing with an abstraction,
that the idea of a divine stake or prize identical to violence is foreign to
The Bacchae. This idea may indeed be only suggested here but no one
can deny that it is explicit elsewhere and that it is quintessentially
Greek. Certainly it is quite explicit in Homer—that is, in a literary text
predating the tragedies.

There are several terms in Homer that dramatically illuminate the rela-
tionship of violence, desire, and divinity. The most useful, perhaps, in the
context of our discussion is the substantive kudos. Kudos is best defined in
terms of semidivine prestige, of mystical election attained by military vic-
tory. It was the reward sought by both Greek and Trojan, particularly in
single combat.

In his Dictionary of Indo-European Institutions Benveniste translates
kudos as “talisman of supremacy.” It is the fascination of superior violence.
Violence strikes men as at once seductive and terrifying; never as a simple
means to an end, but as an epiphany. Violence tends to generate unanim-
ity, either in its favor or against it. And violence promotes imbalance,
tipping the scales of Destiny in one direction or another.

At the least success violence begins to snowball, becoming finally an
irresistible avalanche. Those who possess kudos see their strength multi-
plied a hundredfold; those deprived of it discover that they are hopelessly
handicapped. Kudos passes to the man who strikes the hardest—the vic-
tor of the moment. It belongs to the man who manages to convince
others, and who believes himself, that his violence is completely irresist-
ible. The opposition must then exert itself to break the spell cast by this
conviction and to wrest the kudos from the enemy’s grasp.

When the rivalry becomes so intense that it destroys or disperses all its
objects, it turns upon itself; kudos alone becomes the ultimate object. The
word is sometimes translated “glory,” but, as Benveniste has remarked,
such a translation ignores the magico-religious aspects that are funda-
mental to the term. Although the modern world lacks a word for this
phenomenon, the phenomenon itself is familiar. The spiritual effects of
triumphant violence are readily apparent in sexual activity, in games of
skill or chance, in athletic matches, and in contests and competitions of all
kinds. For the Greeks, the issue of violence carried to its extreme was
divinity itself. The epithet kudros signifies an attitude of triumphant
majesty, a demeanor characteristic of the gods. Man can enjoy this condi-
tion only fleetingly, and always at the expense of other men. To be a god is to
possess kudos forever, to remain forever a master, unchallenged and
unchallangeable. That is beyond the reach of mortal man.

It is the gods who confer kudos on men and the gods who take it away.
The intermingling of human and divine in human conflicts is so obvious
that even Benveniste acknowledges it here; in other cases where this mix-
ture is present he tries to separate the human and the divine, even though
their combination might offer a clue to the process of sacralization.

As long as the concept of kudos exists—that is, as long as there exists a
prize, eminently desirable and thoroughly abstract, that men strive con-
stantly to wrest from one another—there can be no transcendent force
capable of restoring peace. What we are witnessing in this struggle for
kudos is the decomposition of the divine, brought about by violent reci-
procity. When the tide of battle turns against them, Homer’s warriors
sometimes justify their retreat with remarks like “Today Zeus has chosen
to bestow kudos on our enemies; perhaps tomorrow he will give it to us.”
This alternation of kudos is identical to the alternations of tragedy. We
may even wonder whether the division of the gods into two camps in the
Hiad is not a late development. The original version may have involved a
single god, the personification of kudos, who oscillated from one camp to
another depending on the course of battle.

In some Euripidean tragedies the alternation between “high” and “low”
is sharply delineated. It is linked to a form of violence that is no longer
physical but spiritual, that inverts the relationship between dominating
and dominated. In Andromache, for instance, Hermione treats the heroine
with complete disdain, insisting on the vast gulf that must separate
Neoptolemus’ lawful wife and queen from his mistress, a captive slave at
the mercy of her captors. Presently, however, the tragic peripeteia takes
place. Hermione meets her downfall, and becomes in effect the slave of
Andromache:

What god would I invoke? At what shrine offer prayers? Must I slavishly
embrace the knees of a slave?

Euripides is less interested in the changes of circumstance brought
about by the plot than in Hermione’s overreaction to these changes. The
nurse remarks:

My child, I did not hide my disapproval when you gave way to such violent
hatred for the Trojan woman; nor do I now approve your giving way to panic.


Overreaction is characteristic of these tragic reversals of fortune. Yet the
overreactions that actually serve to alter the power structure in the play
are drawn from other sources. Although no decisive action has taken
place while Neoptolemus was away in Delphi, a tragic debate has taken
place between Hermione’s father Menelaus, who is determined to kill
Andromache, and the aged Peleus, who stands forth as her champion.
Peleus gains the upper hand and emerges with kudos.

The transferal of kudos is not simply a subjective matter, though it is not
objective either. It involves a relationship in which the roles of dominat-
ing and dominated are constantly reversed. Neither psychological nor
sociological interpretations can help us here. There is no point in invoking
a master-slave dialectic because the situation affords no stability of any
sort, no synthetic resolution.

In the end the kudos means nothing. It is the prize of a temporary
victory, an advantage no sooner won than challenged. It might be com-
pared to those sporting trophies that are passed from winner to winner
and that are really nothing but a title, an abstraction. To take the meta-
phor too seriously, however, would only lead to another mythical and
ritualistic distortion. Far from subordinating religion to sport or play (as
does Huizinga in Homo Ludens\, we must subordinate play to religion,
and in particular to the sacrificial crisis. Play has a religious origin, to be
sure, insofar as it reproduces certain aspects of the sacrificial crisis. The
arbitrary nature of the prize makes it clear that the contest has no other
objective than itself, but this contest is regulated in such a manner that,
in principle at least, it can never degenerate into a brutal fight to the
finish.

There is no term in any language that is not accompanied by mytho-
logical inflections. In the case of kudos the reciprocity of the violence is not
relinquished, but is muted so as to suggest some joust or tourney. Because
we see that the prize is worthless we tend to assume that the contest itself,
no matter how perilous, is only a pastime, an event of limited interest to
the protagonists, mere “sport.”

To correct this impression it suffices to consider some other psycho-
logical terms whose mythological inflections are somewhat different.
Thymos, for instance, means soul, spirit, or anger like “the anger of
Oedipus.” At first glance thymos has nothing in common with kudos—
except for one trait, which we would normally consider altogether trivial:
its alternating character. When a man possesses thymos he possesses an
irresistible dynamism. When thymos is withdrawn he is plunged into
anguish and despair. Thymos is derived from the verb thuein, which means
to make smoke, to offer sacrifices; to act violently, to run wild.

The thymos comes and goes at the bidding of the thuein. In fact, kudos
and thymos represent two different and partial aspects of the same prob-
lem. It is not some vulgar trophy or second-rate divinity the adversaries
are trying to wrest from each other’s grasp, but their very souls, their vital
force, their being. Each finds this being reflected in the other’s violence,
because their mimetic desires have converged on one and the same
object.

Cyclothymia is the term psychiatrists use to designate the alternating
presence and absence of thymos. Every case of cyclothymia is characterized
by mimetic desire and a strong competitive drive. Psychiatrists make the
mistake of regarding cyclothymia as an essentially individual phenom-
enon; this isa genuinely mythical misconception, identical to the delusion
whereby men see all sudden reversals of Destiny, all manifestations of
divine anger, as stemming from the action of a single hero (cf. Oedipus the
King). An individual perspective on cyclothymia yields only half the truth.
In all such cases, when one person is high in the favor of fortune, another
is low, and vice versa.

Modem psychiatry often fails to perceive the basic antagonism under-
lying the pathological manifestations of cyclothymia, because all traces of
conflict have vanished. The physical violence, even the harsh language of
the tragic confrontation no longer manifests itself; the adversary himself
has disappeared, or appears in a static form that conceals the reality of the
agonistic process. The conflict seems to take place in a domain far
removed from the hurly-burly of competition and strife. In our own day
literary or artistic creation would qualify as such a domain, for the roman-
tic and modern artist generally claims to draw his creations from the
purest inner sources, from a region uncontaminated by imitation. In an
age where the tyranny of fashion has never been more absolute, the artist
proclaims his independence from all outside influence.

The tragic cyclothymia would engulf an increasing number of indi-
viduals if nothing intervened to stop it and would end by plunging the
whole community into madness and dissolution. Thus we can easily
understand the terrified response of the chorus, its frantic efforts to
remain uninvolved and avoid the contamination of mimetic rivalry. The
virtues of moderation and “common sense,” so dear to ordinary mortals,
are openly challenged by the constant shiftings of the tragic situation. This
timidity of the chorus offends the Romantic sensibilities of modern-day
intellectuals, who are scornful of any reluctance to embrace what is
forbidden by custom and law.

Some will attribute the cautiousness of the Greek chorus to a pusil-
lanimous temperament, already at this early date imbued with bourgeois
attitudes, or else to an arbitrary and merciless superego. We must be care-
ful to note, however, that it is not the “sinful” act in itself that horrifies the
chorus so much as the consequences of this act, which the chorus under-
stands only too well. The vertiginous oscillations of tragedy can shake the
firmest foundations and bring the strongest houses crashing to the
ground.

Fortunately, even among modern readers there are some who do not
hold tragic “conformism” in scorn; certain exceptional individuals who
have succeeded, through genius and a good deal of pain, in arriving at a
full appreciation of the tragic concept of peripeteia.

At the very portals of madness, Hélderlin paused to question Antigone
and Oedipus the King. Swept up by the same vertiginous movement that
seized the heroes of Sophocles, he tried desperately to attain that state of
moderate equilibrium celebrated by the chorus. The relationship between
tragedy and Hélderlin’s madness becomes clear if we accept as literal facts
the accounts of his existence set forth in the poet’s own poems, novels,
essays, and letters. The premises of madness are sometimes neither more
nor less than an exceptional encounter with feelings appropriate to Greek
tragedy: an increasingly stressful alternation between moments of super-
human exhaltation and hours when only the emptiness and desolation of
life holds any illusion of reality. The god bestows his presence on the poet
only, it seems, to withdraw it. A thin thread of remembrance links these
alternating visitations and absences, a thread just strong enough to assure
the individual’s sense of continuity and to sustain those visions of the past
that heighten the intoxication of possession but render even more painful
the anguish of loss. A being who thought himself eternally damned finds
himself ecstatically involved in his own resurrection; a being who thought
himself a god is struck with horror at the revelation of his self-delusion.
The god is other, and the poet, though still alive, is little better than a
corpse, for he has lost all reason for living. He is like a sacrificial lamb,
dumbly submitting to the executioner’s knife.

Hélderlin’s god often bears a proper name—sometimes the name of the
poet himself, sometimes that of another. Usually that other is at the outset
a woman, who later assumes the features of a man—the poet Schiller.
Contrary to what Jean Laplanche asserts, there is no essential difference
between masculine and feminine attributions.’ The idolized antagonist
undergoes first a feminine incarnation, then a masculinc incarnation. As
the poet’s correspondence makes clear, this substitution is unrelated to
any sexual difficulties. On the contrary, amatory success deprives the
sexual domain of its value as a fest between the I and the other.

The constant shifting back and forth from divinity to nothingness in
Hélderlin’s relationships with others is expressed in poetic, mythic, quasi-
religious terms as well as in a perfectly rational form, which is at once the
most deceptive and most revealing of all. His letters to Schiller lucidly
describe the plight of the disciple who sees his model transformed into an
obstacle and rival.

In his “Thalia Fragment,” a first draft for the Hyperion, Hélderlin writes:

I imagined that the poverty of our nature would change to abundance when
two such wretched creatures [men] could share one heart, a single and indivis-
ible life, as if all the ills of our existence were brought about by the dissolution
of some primitive unity.

With melancholy rapture (I can still sense it), thinking of naught but how to
find someone to accept the gift of my loving smile, of how to give myself to the
first passerby. ... Ah! How often I then believed I had encountered and pos-
sessed the Ineffable simply by having dared to delve to the very depths of my
love! How often I believed I had been granted direct access to the divine! I
called out, called again, and the poor creature put in an appearance; embar-
rassed, ill at ease, often even slightly aggressive—he wanted only a little
pleasure, certainly nothing very demanding!

What a blind imbecile I was! I was seeking pearls from beggars even poorer
than myself; so very poor, so sunken in poverty, that they were incapable of
judging the extent of their misery and delighted in the rags and tatters which
covered their naked bodies... .

In fact, when it seemed to me that the last remnants of my lost life were at
stake, and when my pride began to revive, I found that I had become a mass of
unleashed activity and I discovered in myself the omnipotence of despair.
Whenever my wan and languishing spirit happened to imbibe an unexpected
draught of happiness I flung myself precipitously into the midst of the crowd,
spoke out in inspired tones, and sometimes even felt welling up in my eyes the
tears of felicity. Or whenever the thought of image of a hero flashed across
the dark firmament of my soul, I rejoiced in my surprise, as if a god had seen fit
to visit my forlorn domain. And it seemed to me then that a whole world was
about to take shape within me. But the more suddenly these dormant powers
were stirred into awakening, the more precipitous was their subsequent
decline, and unsatiated nature experienced a redoubling of afflictions.


In a letter to Schiller Hélderlin writes:

I have sufficient courage and judgment to free myself from other masters
and critics and to pursue my own path with the tranquil spirit necessary for
such an endeavor, but in regard to you, my dependence is insurmountable; and
because I know the profound effect a single word from you can have on me, I
sometimes strive to put you out of my mind so as not to be overcome by
anxiety at my work. For I am convinced that such anxiety, such worry is the
death of art, and I understand perfectly well why it is more difficult to give
proper expression to nature when the artist finds himself surrounded by mas-
terpieces than when he is virtually alone amidst the living world. He finds
himself too closely involved with nature, too intimately linked with it, to con-
sider the need for rebelling against its authority or for submitting to it. But this
terrible alternation is almost inevitable when the young artist is exposed to the
mature genius of a master, which is more forceful and comprehensible than
nature, and thus more capable of enslaving him. It is not a case of one child
playing with another child—the primitive equilibrium attained between the
first artist and his world no longer holds. The child is now dealing with men
with whom he will never in all probability be familiar enough to forget their
superiority. And if he feels this superiority he must become either rebellious or
servile. Or must he? .. .

When differences begin to shift back and forth the cultural order loses
its stability; all its elements constantly exchange places. So it is that in
tragedy the differences between the antagonists never vanish entirely,
but are constantly inverted. In such a system enemy “brothers” can
never occupy the same position at the same time. Earlier I defined this
system in terms of abolished distinctions, of symmetry and reciprocity.
Now I am saying that differences never really disappear. The contradic-
tion between the two definitions is, I trust, a contradiction in appearance
only.

In a tragedy the reciprocal relationship between the characters is real,
but it is the sum of nonreciprocal moments. The antagonists never occupy
the same positions at the same time, to be sure; but they occupy these
positions in succession. There is never anything on one side of the system
that cannot be found on the other side, provided we wait long enough.
The quicker the rhythm of reprisals, the shorter the wait. The faster the
blows rain down, the clearer it becomes that there is no difference
between those who strike the blows and those who receive them. On both
sides everything is equal; not only the desire, the violence, the strategy,
but also the alternation of victory and defeat, of exaltation and despair.
Everywhere we encounter the same cyclothymia.

My original definition therefore holds, and I trust that the concept of
shifting differences serves to refine it. After all, it is not the elimination of
differences that lends itself to direct observation, but the successive inver-
sion of differences. In the temporal plan of the system there is not a
moment when those involved in the action do not see themselves separ-
ated from their rivals by formidable differences. When one of the
“brothers” assumes the role of father and king, the other cannot but feel
himself to be the disinherited son. That explains why the antagonists only
rarely perceive the reciprocal nature of their involvement. Each is too
intensely engaged in living out his nonreciprocal moment to grasp the
whole picture, to take in several of these moments in a single glance and
compare them in such a way as to penetrate the illusory quality of singu-
larity that each moment, observed in isolation, seems to possess—in a
universe that otherwise appears commonplace, banal, without interest.
The same characters who are blind to the phenomenon of reciprocity
while they are caught up in it perceive it all too well when they are not
involved. That is why, during the sacrificial crisis, all men are endowed
with the spirit of prophecy—a vainglorious wisdom that deserts them
when they themselves are put to the test.

Because they are essentially outsiders and therefore misread the differ-
ences shifting back and forth between the antagonists, Ocdipus, Creon,
and Tiresias in turn imagine themselves capable of “banishing the
plague’—that is, of serving as arbitrator in the conflicts convulsing
Thebes. Each thinks that he can make it clear to the antagonists that no
difference actually stands between them. And each in turn is drawn into
the conflict whose contagiousness he failed to comprehend.

From within the system, only differences are perceived; from without,
the antagonists all seem alike. From inside, sameness is not visible; from
outside, differences cannot be seen.

Only the outside perspective, which takes into consideration reciprocity
and unity and denies the difference, can discern the workings of the vio-
lent resolution, the cryptic process by which unanimity is reformed
against and around the surrogate victim. When all differences have been
eliminated and the similarity between two figures has been achieved, we
say that the antagonists are doubles. It is their interchangeability that
makes possible the act of sacrificial substitution.

My reading of Oedipus the King is based on this “outside” perspective, on
an objectivity that takes in at a glance the identity of all the antagonists.
However, the generative unanimity does not come from outside. It is
produced by the antagonists themselves, to whom the objective outlook is
utterly alien. The preceding description, then, cannot be sufficient. In
order for violent unanimity to become a possibility—in order, that is, for
the sacrificial substitution to function—their own identity and reciprocity
must somehow impose themselves on the antagonists themselves, and
triumph within the confines of the system. Both the outside and inside
viewpoints must communicate, yet remain distinct; the misapprehension
must remain within the system, for otherwise the polarization of violence
onto the surrogate victim could not be effected, and the arbitrary choice of
that victim would be too readily evident.

We must be prepared, therefore, to start our analysis afresh, and try to
examine from within the mechanism responsible for sacrificial substitution
in the crisis-ridden community.

As [have said, the differences that seem to separate the antagonists shift
ever faster and more abruptly as the crisis grows in intensity. Beyond a
certain point the nonreciprocal moments succeed each other with such
speed that their actual passage becomes blurred. They seem to overlap,
forming a composite image in which all the previous “highs” and “lows,”
the extremes that had previously stood out in bold relief, now seem to
intersect and mingle. Where formerly he had seen his antagonist and
himself as incarnations of unique and separate moments in the temporal
scheme of things, the subject now perceives two simultaneous projections
of the entire time span—an effect that is almost cinematographic.

Up to this point I have described the system in terms of single, unique
difference, the difference between the “god” and the “non-god.” This is
clearly an oversimplification. The “Dionysiac” state of mind can and, as
we have seen, often does erase all manner of differences: familial, cul-
tural, biological, and natural. The entire everyday world is caught up in
the whirl, producing a hallucinatory state that is not a synthesis of elem-
ents, but a formless and grotesque mixture of things that are normally
separate.

It is this monstrosity, this extraordinary strangeness of the world that
captures the attention not only of the characters involved but also of
latter-day scholars who till the fields of folklore and psychiatry. An
attempt is made to classify the monsters; but despite their initial disparities
they end by resembling one another; no stable difference really serves to
separate them. And there is really nothing very interesting to say about
the hallucinatory aspects of an experience that for all practical purposes
exists solely to divert attention from the essential fact, which is that the
antagonists are truly doubles.

A fundamental principle, often overlooked, is that the double and the
monster are one and the same being. The myth, of course, emphasizes
only one aspect (usually the monstrous aspect) in order to minimize the
other. There is no monster who does not tend to duplicate himself or to
“marry” another monster, no double who does not yield a monstrous
aspect upon close scrutiny.* The duality claims precedence—without,
however, eliminating the monstrous; and in the duality of the monster
the true structure of the experience is put in relief. The nature of the
relationship between monster and double, stubbornly denied by the an-
tagonists, is ultimately imposed on them in the course of the shifting of
differences—but it is imposed in the form of a hallucination. The unity and
reciprocity that the enemy brothers have rejected in the benign form of
brotherly love finally impose themselves, both from without and within,
in the form of monstrous duality—the most disquieting and grotesque
form imaginable.

We can expect little help from literature and even less from medicine in
our investigation of the double. Doctors not infrequently share their
patients’ fascination with burgeoning monstrosities. In so doing they
neglect the crucial aspects of the experience: its reciprocal character, its
affinity with violence. Psychoanalysts and folklorists declare that these
hallucinatory phenomena are purely imaginary. They refuse to acknow-
ledge the reality of the symmetry that underlies the fantasy. This trans-
formation of the real into the unreal is part of the process by which man
conceals from himself the human origin of his own violence, by attribut-
ing it to the gods. To say that the monstrous double is a god or that he is
purely imaginary is to say the same thing in different terms. Our abstract
skepticism vis-a-vis religion serves admirably to fill the function formerly
performed by religion itself.

To my knowledge only Dostoevsky, both in his early novel The Double
and in the masterpieces of his maturity has set forth in concrete terms the
elements of reciprocity at work in the proliferation of monsters.

In the collective experience of the monstrous double the differences are
not eliminated, but muddied and confused. All the doubles are inter-
changeable, although their basic similarity is never formally acknow-
ledged. They thus occupy the equivocal middle ground between difference
and unity that is indispensable to the process of sacrificial substitution—to
the polarization of violence onto a single victim who substitutes for all
the others. The monstrous double gives the antagonists, incapable of per-
ceiving that nothing actually stands between them (or their reconcili-
ation), precisely what they need to arrive at the compromise that involves
unanimity minus the victim of the generative expulsion. The monstrous
double, all monstrous doubles in the person of one—the “thousand-
headed dragon” of The Bacchae—becomes the object of unanimous
violence:

Appear, great bull!

Come, dragon with a thousand heads!

O come to us, fire-breathing lion!

Quick, quick, you smiling Bacchant, and cast your fatal net about this man
who dares to hunt you Maenads!

We can now appreciate the atmosphere of terror and hallucination that
accompanies the primordial religious experience. When violent hysteria
reaches a peak the monstrous double looms up everywhere at once. The
decisive act of violence is directed against this awesome vision of evil and
at the same time sponsored by it. The turmoil then gives way to calm;
hallucinations vanish, and the détente that follows only heightens the
mystery of the whole process. In an instant all extremes have met, all
differences fused; superhuman exemplars of violence and peace have in
that instant coincided. Modern pathological experiences offer no such
catharsis; but although religious and pathological experiences cannot be
equated, they share certain similarities.

Many literary texts, both ancient and modern, make reference to the
double, to duality, to double vision—references that have long been dis-
regarded. In The Bacchae, the monstrous double is everywhere. As we
have seen, from the opening of the play animal, human, and divine are
caught up in a frenetic interchange; beasts are mistaken for men or gods,
gods and men mistaken for beasts. Perhaps the most intriguing instance
of this confusion occurs during the encounter between Dionysus and
Pentheus, shortly before Pentheus is murdered—that is, at the very
moment when the enemy brother is due to disappear behind the form of
the monstrous double.

And that is exactly what happens. Pentheus has already fallen prey to
Dionysiac vertigo; he sees double:

Pentheus: 1 seem to see two suns, two Thebes, with two times seven gates. And
you, you are a bull walking before me, with two horns sprouting from your
head.

Dionysus: You see what you ought to see.

In this extraordinary exchange the theme of the double appears initially
in a form completely exterior to the subject, as a double vision of
inanimate objects, an attack of dizziness. Here we are dealing solely with
hallucinatory elements; they are undeniably a part of the experience, but
only a part, and not the essential one. As the passage unfolds, so too does
its meaning. Pentheus associates the double vision with the vision of the
monster. Dionysus is at once man, god, and bull. The reference to the
bull’s horns links the two themes: doubles are always monstrous, and
duality is always an attribute of monsters.

Dionysus’s words are arresting: “ You see what you ought to see.” By seeing
double, by seeing Dionysus himself as a monster bearing the double seal
of duality and bestiality, Pentheus conforms to the immutable rules of the
game. Master of the game, the god makes sure that events take their
course according to his plan. The plan is identical to the process we have
just described, with the monstrous double making his appearance at the
height of the crisis, just before the unanimous resolution.

These lines become even more intriguing when read in conjunction
with the passage that follows. Now we have to reckon not with hallucin-
ation or vertigo but with real flesh and blood doubles. The identical nature
of the antagonists is explicitly formulated:

Pentheus: Tell me, who do I look like? Like Ino, or like my mother Agaué?
Dionysus: You seem the very image of them both.

Similarities are at the heart of the encounter, but the question is treated
ambiguously, in terms of family resemblance—a formulation brought to
mind by Pentheus’ transvestite masquerade. Yet something more is
clearly at stake here. Surely it is the similarity of doubles that is being
suggested; that of the surrogate victim and the community that expells it,
of the sacrificed and the sacrificer. All differences are abolished. “You seem
the very image of them both”: once again it is the god himself who confirms
the basic principles of a process initiated by him and which, in fact, comes
to seem a sign of his presence.

The writings of another ancient author are equally vital, I believe, to a
discussion of the monstrous double. Empedocles’ description of the birth
of monsters has never been adequately interpreted. However, if the cycles
described by the philosopher correspond to a cultural system founded on
an act of generative violence, maintained by ritual, and destroyed by a
new sacrificial crisis, then we can scarcely doubt that the birth of monsters
as described by him is meant to suggest the terrible apparition of the
monstrous double. The author attributes the cyclical movement to
the alternation of two fundamental impulses, Love and Hate. The birth of
monsters come about through the attraction of like for like, under the aegis, not
of Love, but of Hate, before the birth of a new world:

Then there began to sprout in profusion heads without necks, and arms
without bodies or shoulders swarmed everywhere, and naked eyes floated as
planets [in the world of Hate].

The dismembered limbs, subservient to the will of Hate, wander about
separately, yearning to unite.

But as soon as a god draws closer in harmony to another god, the limbs
begin to link up at random, and they all rush together;

We find creatures with revolving legs and countless hands.

Others are born with two faces, two torsos; there are cows with human
heads and men with the heads of cows; and hermaphrodites, whose sex is
shrouded in mystery.

The interpretation I propose happens to coincide with the recent ten-
dency to reject “physical” interpretations of pre-Socratic thought; inter-
pretations that are, to be sure, always dependent on the belief that the
primary purpose of myths is to explain natural phenomena. Although
the more recent interpretations are superior to the early ones they
still, I believe, underestimate the religious element in the thinking of
Empedocles, and indeed in all the pre-Socratics.

My attempt to link the passage from Empedocles with the phenomenon
of the monstrous double may seem less far-fetched if we consider this
passage in conjunction with another work of Empedocles, Purifications. 1
alluded to this work earlier on, but it seems to take on new significance in
this context. “The father takes hold of his son who has changed form, and in
a fit of madness, sacrifices him; the son cries out, but his pleas fall on deaf
ears; the demented father cuts the son’s throat, and prepares an abomin-
able feast in his palace. Similarly, the son seizes the father and the children
of their mother, kills them all and devours their flesh.”

Whether or not we choose to take this passage literally, it underscores
the atmosphere of acute sacrificial crisis that was the background for
Empedocles’ work. The father kills his son who has changed form, just as
Agaué kills her son who has changed form, mistaking him for a lion, and just
as Pentheus mistakes Dionysus for a bull. As in The Bacchae, we are
witnessing the degeneration of a rite into a form of reciprocal violence
that is so irrational it conjures up the monstrous double. That is, it harkens
back to the very origins of the rite and thus closes the circle of religious
compositions and decompositions that preoccupied the pre-Socratics.

The apparition of the monstrous double cannot be verified empirically;
nor for that matter can the body of phenomena that forms the basis for
any primitive religion. Despite the texts cited above the monstrous double
remains a hypothetical creation, as do the other phenomena associated
with the mechanism that determines the choice of surrogate victim. The
validity of the hypothesis is confirmed, however, by the vast number of
mythological, ritualistic, philosophical, and literary motifs that it is able to
explain, as well as by the quality of the explanations, by the coherence it
imposes on phenomena that until now appeared isolated and obscure.

My hypothesis permits me to essay an explanation of two sets of phe-
nomena that are among the most puzzling in all human culture: possession
and the ritual use of masks.

Under the heading monstrous double we shall group all the hallucinatory
phenomena provoked at the height of the crisis by unrecognized reci-
procity. The monstrous double is also to be found wherever we encounter
an “I” and an “Other” caught up in a constant interchange of differences.
The same set of images is projected almost simultaneously in two sym-
metrical locations. In The Bacchae we discover two types of phenomena
that are capable of rapid interchange. The subject of the action, Pentheus,
at first sees the two series of images as exterior to himself; this is the
phenomenon of “double vision.” A moment later one of the two series is
perceived as “not me,” and the other as “me.” It is this second experience
we are referring to when we use the term double. It is a direct extension
of the previous stages, and it retains the concept of an antagonist exterior
to the subject—a concept crucial to an understanding of possession.

The subject watches the monstrosity that takes shape within him and
outside him simultaneously. In his efforts to explain what is happening to
him, he attributes the origin of the apparition to some exterior cause.
Surely, he thinks, this vision is too bizarre to emanate from the familiar
country within, too foreign in fact to derive from the world of men. The
whole interpretation of the experience is dominated by the sense that the
monster is alien to himself.

The subject feels that the most intimate regions of his being have
been invaded by a supernatural creature who also besieges him without.
Horrified, he finds himself the victim of a double assault to which he
cannot respond. Indeed, how can one defend oneself against an enemy
who blithely ignores all barriers between inside and outside? This extra-
ordinary freedom of movement permits the god—or spirit or demon—to
seize souls at will. The condition called “possession” is in fact but one
particular interpretation of the monstrous double.

It is hardly surprising that possession should often take the form of a
hysterical mimesis. The subject seems to be responding to some outside
influence; he has the jerky movements of a marionette. Some presence
seems to be acting through him—a god, a monster, or whatever creature is
in the process of investing his body. He is caught in the double bind of the
model-obstacle that condemns both partners to a continual heightening
of violence. The monstrous double now takes the place of those objects
that held the attention of the antagonists at a less advanced stage of the
crisis, replacing those things that each had sought to assimilate and
destroy, to incarnate and expel. Possession, then, is an extreme form of
alienation in which the subject totally absorbs the desires of another.

The possessed subject bellows like Dionysus the bull; like a lion he is
ready to devour anyone who ventures within sight. He can even imper-
sonate inanimate objects. He is at the same time one and many beings as
he reenacts the hysterical trance and the crazy mixture of differences that
immediately precedes the collective expulsion. There exist entire sects
devoted to possession, with their own group sessions. It is interesting to
note that in colonial countries or oppressed societies it is often the repre-
sentatives of the dominant power—the governor-general or the sentry at
the barracks gate—who serve as models.

Possession, like everything pertaining to primordial religious experi-
ence, tends to acquire a ritual character. The existence of a ritual form of
possession implies that something in the nature of an intense case of
collective possession took place imifially; for it is of course that spon-
taneous occurrence that the ritual is striving to reproduce. Ritual posses-
sion seems inseparable at first from the sacrificial rites that serve as its
culmination. In principle, the religious practices follow the order of the
cycle of violence they are attempting to imitate. Such is the case with the
Dinka, in those occasional instances in which possession precedes the
immolation of the victim. As soon as the excitement aroused by the
chants, dances, and mock combats has reached a certain pitch of intensity,
the ritual imprecations pass over into signs of possession. As Lienhardt
recounts it,’ first young men, then adult men and women are overcome.
They stagger about among their companions, then fall to the ground in
convulsions, moaning or emitting piercing cries.

In some sects possession is regarded as beneficial, in others as harmful.
And there are still others that consider possession beneficial or harmful,
depending on the circumstances. Behind these diverse attitudes lies a
problem of interpretation similar to the one we have discussed in connec-
tion with ritual incest and with festivals. In dealing with liberating
violence religion can choose either faithfully to reenact the all too charac-
teristic phenomena of the crisis or systematically to ignore them. The
phenomenon of possession, therefore, can appear as sickness, cure, or
both at once.

As the rites disintegrate some of the elements that formed them tend to
disappear. Others assume new identities, divorced from their past context.
Possessions, like many other aspects of primordial experience, can
become the chief object of religious preoccupation. In such cases “posses-
sion cults” arise. The group sessions of the cult find their climax in an act
of sacrificial slaughter.® At a later stage of the cult the sacrifice disappears
from the rites. The shamans then try to utilize possession for magico-
medical purposes. They become “specialists” in the practice of possession.
Still another ritual practice acquires fresh significance in the light of
investigations into the monstrous double: the ritual use of masks.

Masks are among the necessary tools of many primitive sects, but we
cannot answer with certainty the questions raised by their presence. What
do they represent? What is their purpose? How did they originate? Surely
there must be some unifying factor, some criterion for masks, among the
great variety of forms and styles, something we can recognize if not
define. After all, whenever we encounter a mask we do not hesitate to
identify it as such. The unity of the mask cannot be extrinsic; it exists in
societies remote from each other in space and culture, and it cannot be
traced to a single geographical locus. The almost universal use of masks is
often said to answer some deep-seated “esthetic need.” Primitive people,
we are told, are obsessed with “disguises”; they also have a compulsion to
“create forms.”

This kind of art criticism offers no real answer to the problem of masks.
Primitive art, after all, is fundamentally religious. And masks will
undoubtedly, therefore, serve a religious function. They are certainly not
“pure inventions”; their models vary greatly from culture to culture, but
certain traits remain constant. Although it would not be correct to say that
masks invariably represent the human face, they are almost always
associated with it: designed to cover the face, to replace it, or in some way
to substitute for it.

The problem of the unity and diversity of masks is the same as that of
the unity and diversity of myths and rituals. It undoubtedly originates in
some real experience, common to a large portion of humanity but now
lost to us.

Like the festival in which it often plays an important role, the mask
displays combinations of forms and colors incompatible with a differenti-
ated order that is not primarily that of nature but of the culture itself. The
mask mixes man and beast, god and inanimate object. Victor Turner
makes reference to a ndembu mask that represents at once a human face
and a meadow.’ Masks juxtapose beings and objects separated by differ-
ences. They are beyond differences; they do not merely defy differences or
efface them, but they incorporate and rearrange them in original fashion.
In short, they are another aspect of the monstrous double.

The ritual ceremonies that require the use of masks are reenactments of
the original experience. In many cases the celebrants (at least, those who
play the most important role in the ceremony) don masks at the climax of
the rite, just before the sacrifice. These rites permit the participants to play
out all the roles performed by their ancestors during the original crisis.
They are enemies first, engaging in mock combats and symmetrical
dances; then they put on their masks and change into monstrous doubles.
The mask is no apparition drawn from the thin air; it is a transformation of
the antagonists’ normal features. The different modes of its ritual use, the
structure within which the masks operate, are in most cases more reveal-
ing than any terms their wearers may use to describe them. If the mask is
intended to conceal human faces at a fixed point in the ritual, that is
because this is what happened to human faces the first time. Masks, then,
serve as an interpretation and concrete representation of phenomena that
we described previously in purely theoretical terms.

There is no point in trying to determine whether masks represent
human or supernatural beings. An inquiry of that kind is relevant only to
later developments of the ritual, brought about by a further accentuation
of differences, a deepening misapprehension of the phenomena that the
ritualistic use of masks allows the wearers to reenact. Masks stand at
that equivocal frontier between the human and the “divine,” between a
differentiated order in the process of disintegration and its final un-
differentiated state—the point where all differences, all monstrosities are
concentrated, and from which a new order will emerge. There is no point
in trying to determine the “nature” of masks, because it is in their nature
not to have a nature but to encompass all natures.

Greek tragedy, like the festival and indeed all other rites, is primarily a
representation of the sacrificial crisis and the generative violence. The use
of masks in the Greek theater requires, therefore, no special explanation;
the masks serve the same role as they do elsewhere. Masks disappear
when the monsters once again assume human form, when tragedy com-
pletely forgets its ritual origins. That is not to say, of course, that tragedy
ceases to play a sacrificial role in the broad sense. On the contrary; it has
taken over the role of ritual.

Notes

1 Fora discussion of these works see my Deceit, Desire, and the Novel (Baltimore,
1965).

2 See Gregory Bateson et al., “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” in Steps to an
Ecology of the Mind (New York, 1972), pp. 201-27.

3 Jean Laplanche, Hélderlin et la question du pere (Paris, 1961).
The hysterical experience of the four lovers in A Midsummer Night's Dream isa
powerful description of this process that generates the monsters of the night,
notably the “marriage” of Titania, queen of the fairies, with an ass-headed
Bottom. See René Girard, “More than Fancy’s Images: A reading of A
Midsummer Night's Dream,” in Textual Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structuralist
Criticism, ed. Josue Harari (Ithaca, N.Y., 1979).

5 Godfrey Lienhardt, Divinity and Experience, pp. 136-37, 274, et passim.

6 Cf. Jeanmaire’s description of the Zar and Bori (Dionysos, pp. 119-31.)

7 Victor Turner, The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual (Ithaca, N.Y.,
1970), p. 105.

8 Freud and the Oedipus Complex


We can observe both similarities and differences between the mimetic
desire described in the previous chapter and Freud’s Oedipus complex.
Mimetism is a source of continual conflict. By making one man’s desire
into a replica of another man’s desire, it invariably leads to rivalry; and
rivalry in turn transforms desire into violence. Although Freud may
appear on first glance to have ignored this mechanism, he in fact came
very close to apprehending it. A rigorous examination of this text will
make it clear why he ultimately failed to do so.

The mimetic nature of desire plays an important role in Freud’s
work—not important enough, however, to dominate and revolutionize
his thinking. His mimetic intuitions are incompletely formulated; they
constitute a dimension of his text that is only half visible and tends to
disappear in transmission. There is nothing surprising about the refusal
of present-day psychoanalysts to turn their attention to this subject.
Factions of psychoanalytic thought, bitterly opposed in other respects, are
here at one. The mimetic aspect of desire has been ignored at once by
those whose main concern is the elimination of inconsistencies in
Freud’s work in favor of a unified whole and by that other group who,
while orthodox Freudians in name, quietly reject some of the most lucid
and cogent of Freud’s analyses on the grounds that they are tainted with
“psychologism.”

Although traces of the mimetic conception are scattered through
Freud’s work, this conception never assumes a dominant role. It runs
counter to the Freudian insistence on a desire that is fundamentally
directed toward an object; that is, sexual desire for the mother. When the
tension between these opposing tendencies becomes too great, both
Freud and his disciples seem to resolve it in favor of the object-desire.

The mimetic intuition of Freud gives rise to a series of concepts
ambiguous in definition, obscure in status, and vague in function. Among
the offshoots of this ill-defined mimetic desire are certain concepts that
come under the heading identification. Among the categories of Freudian
identification, one that nowadays receives little attention is the first one
discussed in the chapter entitled “Identification,” in Group Psychology and
the Analysis of the Ego. This category has to do with the father: “A little boy
will exhibit a special interest in his father; he would like to grow like and
be like him, and take his place everywhere. We may say simply that he
takes his father as his ideal. This behavior has nothing to do with a passive
or feminine attitude towards his father (and towards males in general); it
is on the contrary typically masculine. It fits in very well with the Oedipus
complex, for which it helps to prepare the way.”!

There is a clear resemblance between identification with the father and
mimetic desire; both involve the choice of a model. The choice is not really
determined by parentage, for the child can select as model any man who
happens to fill the role that our society normally assigns to the natural
father.

As we have pointed out in the previous chapter, the mimetic model
directs the disciple’s desire to a particular object by desiring it himself.
That is why we can say that mimetic desire is rooted neither in the subject
nor in the object, but in a third party whose desire is imitated by the
subject. Granted, the passage quoted above is hardly explicit on this point.
But its implications are clear and conform to our definition of mimetic
desire. Freud asserts that the identification has nothing passive or femi-
nine about it; a passive or feminine identification would mean that the
son wanted to become the object of his father’s desire. How, then, will the
active and “typically masculine” identification realize itself? Either it is
wholly imaginary, or it finds concrete form in the desire for some particular
object. The identification is a desire fo be the model that seeks fulfillment,
naturally enough, by means of appropriation; that is, by taking over the
things that belong to his father. As Freud says, the son seeks to take the
father’s place everywhere; he thus seeks to assume his desires, to desire
what the father desires. The proof that we are not distorting Freud’s inten-
tion is supplied by the last sentence of the passage: “[The identification]
fits very well with the Oedipus complex, for which it helps to prepare
the way.”

What can this sentence mean, if not that identification directs desire
toward those objects desired by the father? We have here an undeniable
instance of filial desire undergoing the influence of mimesis. Con-
sequently, there already exists in Freud’s thought, at this stage, a latent
conflict between this mimetic process of paternal identification and
the autonomous establishment of a particular object as a basis for desire—
the sexual cathexis toward the mother.

This conflict is all the more apparent because identification with the
father is presented as fundamental to the boy’s development, anterior to
any choice of object. Freud emphasizes this point in the opening sentences of
an analysis that will eventually unfold into an overall description of the
Oedipus complex and that is to be found in the chapter on identification
previously referred to.’ After identification with the father comes the sex-
ual cathexis toward the mother, which, according to Freud, first appears
and develops independently. The object-choice of the mother appears to
have its origins in two factors: first, the identification with the father, the
mimesis; second, the fixation of the libido on the mother. These two forces
act together and reinforce one another, as Freud makes clear a few lines
further on. After having subsisted “side by side for a time without any
mutual influence or interference,” the two “come together at last,” and
the libidinal drive is thereby strengthened. This is a wholly natural and
logical turn of events if we choose to regard this identification as the
mimesis of paternal desire. Indeed, once we have seen matters in this light
all other explanations seem irrelevant.

I am not trying to put words in Freud’s mouth. In fact, it is my conten-
tion that Freud saw the path of mimetic desire stretching out before him
and deliberately turned aside. One need only examine his definition of
the Oedipus complex, which follows a few lines further on, to see how he
evades the issue: “The little boy notices that his father stands in his
way with his mother. His identification with his father takes on a hostile
colouring and becomes identical with the wish to replace his father in
regard to his mother as well. Identification, in fact, is ambivalent from the
very first ...”?

The passage contains at least one point well worth noting. When, as
Freud explains, the son discovers that his father is becoming an obstacle to
him, his identification fuses with his desire “to replace his father in regard
to his mother as well.” That “as well” rivets the attention. Freud has
earlier defined identification as the desire to replace the father, and he
now repeats that formula. Must we therefore conclude that the mother
was initially excluded, implicitly or explicitly, from the program? On
examining the definition we see nothing that suggests such an exclusion;
quite the contrary. As Freud has put it: “The little boy will exhibit a special
interest in his father; he would like to grow like and be like him, and take
his place everywhere [italics added].”

The casual reader may well assume that the “as well” in the phrase “in
regard to the mother as well” is merely a slip of the pen; after all, if the son
wants to replace his father “everywhere,” it follows that he would want to
replace him in regard to the mother. But this apparent triviality in phras-
ing conceals an important point. As we have seen, it is impossible to
elucidate Freud’s theory of identification without encountering a mimetic
mechanism that makes the father into the desire model. It is the father
who directs the son’s attention to desirable objects by desiring them him-
self; thus, the boy’s desires are inevitably directed toward his own mother.
This much is clearly implied by Freud’s text, yet these conclusions are
never made explicit. Of course, it is possible that they never took shape in
his mind, though they must surely have hovered there in some form
when he was writing the opening passages of chapter 7, “Identification.”
Having first implied a mimetic interpretation, Freud then rejected it, also
by implication, with the phrase “his mother as well.” Such is the hidden
meaning of that “as well.” The two words retrospectively neutralize any
mimetic interpretation of identification, at least in regard to the object of
primary importance—the mother.

Freud’s eagerness to dispell the mimetic elements that were impinging
on his Oedipus theory can readily be discerned in his later work. Here, for
instance, is his definition of the Oedipus complex as stated in The Ego and
the Id (1923):

Ata very early age the little boy develops an object-cathexis for his mother . . .;
the boy deals with his father by identifying himself with him. For a time these
two relationships proceed side by side, until the boy’s sexual wishes in regard
to his mother become more intense and his father is perceived as an obstacle to
them; from this the Oedipus complex originates. His identification with his
father then takes on a hostile colouring and changes into a wish to get rid of
his father in order to take his place with his mother. Henceforward his relation
to his father is ambivalent; it seems as if the ambivalence inherent in the
identification from the beginning had become manifest.*

At first glance this looks like a faithful resume of the concepts set forth
in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego. A further examination
reveals certain differences that, though apparently minor, are in reality
very important. My previous analysis dealt specifically with the mimetic
elements to be found in the earlier text. It is precisely those elements,
relegated to the shadows in that earlier description of the Oedipus
complex, that are banished entirely from this later definition.

In the earlier text Freud insists on the anteriority of the identification
with the father. In the later text he does not explicitly repudiate this
doctrine, but he gives first mention to the son’s sexual attraction to the
mother. In short, he discourages us from thinking that one and the same
impulse—the wish to take the father’s place everywhere—stimulates
identification with the model and directs desire toward the mother.

That this inversion of the original order is not a matter of chance
becomes abundantly clear when the process is repeated a little further on.
In the second text, we find that the formulation of the “complex” is pre-
ceded by the reinforcement of the sexual wish; but instead of presenting
this reinforcement as a consequence of the boy’s first identification with
the father, Freud inverts the order of the phenomena, thereby formally
rejecting the cause-and-effect relationship suggested initially. This
reinforcement of the libido is now totally lacking in motivation. The effect
is retained, but because it now precedes the cause, neither cause nor effect
seems to make much sense. As we can see, in The Ego and the Id Freud
makes a clean sweep of all mimetic effects, but in so doing he sacrifices
some of the most trenchant insights of Group Psychology and the Analysis of
the Ego and some of his coherence as well.

Why did Freud banish mimesis from his later work? The best way to
reply to this question is to continue along the path abandoned by him, to
discover where he might have gone had he chosen to be guided by those
mimetic effects that abounded in his earlier analyses but that were swept
away as if by magic the instant they were found to cast doubt on his
Oedipus complex. We must, in short, return to that phrase that is surrepti-
tiously contradicted and canceled out by “the mother as well.” To identify
with the father, Freud informed us, is first of all to want to replace him:
the little boy “would like to grow like and be like him, and take his place
everywhere [italics added].”

In order to exclude the mother from this “everywhere,” it is necessary
to assume that the son is already conscious of the “law” and that he
conforms to it without any prior instruction; for in principle it is the father
who is supposed to teach him. But to exclude the mother is in actuality to
assert that the Oedipus complex is already in operation; if that is not true
the mother should be included, and that is what Freud has done—
initially. The comprehensiveness of the statement that the son wishes to
take his father’s place “everywhere” is wholly appropriate, for the son
cannot have a clear and distinct impression of his father’s objects—
including the mother—insofar as they are indeed his father’s. In short, if
the son turns toward his father’s objects it is because he is following the
example of his model, and this model necessarily turns toward his own
objects—those that are already in his possession or that he hopes to
acquire. The disciple’s movement toward the objects of his model, includ-
ing the mother, is already accounted for by the concept of identification as
defined by Freud. Far from discouraging such an interpretation, Freud
seems initially to have encouraged it.

Because disciple and model are converging on the same object, a clash
between them is inevitable. The resulting rivalry appears “Oedipal,” but
it takes on a wholly different meaning. Because it is predetermined by
the model’s choice, there is nothing fortuitous about it; nor is it, strictly
speaking, a question of one person’s usurping what belongs to the
other. The disciple’s attraction to the model’s object is wholly “inno-
cent”; in seeking to take his father’s place with his “mother as well,” the
son is simply responding in all candor to a command issued by the
culture in which he lives and by the model himself. If we pause to
consider closely the model-disciple relationship, it should become clear
that the so-called Oedipal rivalry, reinterpreted in terms of a radically
mimetic situation, must logically result in consequences that are at once
similar to and quite different from those attributed by Freud to his
“complex.”

Earlier on I defined the effects of mimetic rivalry and affirmed that they
invariably end in reciprocal violence. This reciprocity is the result of a
process. If there is a stage in human existence at which reciprocity is not
yet in operation and at which reprisals are impossible, that stage is surely
early childhood. That is why children are so vulnerable. The adult is quick
to sense a violent situation and answer violence with violence; the child,
on the other hand, never having been exposed to violence, reaches out for
his model’s objects with unsuspecting innocence. Only an adult could
interpret the child’s actions in terms of usurpation. Such an interpretation
comes from the depths of a cultural system to which the child does not yet
belong, one that is based on cultural concepts of which the child has not
the remotest notion.

The model-disciple relationship precludes by its very nature that sense
of equality that would permit the disciple to see himself as a possible rival
to the model. The disciple’s position is like that of a worshiper before his
god; he imitates the other’s desires but is incapable of recognizing any
connection between them and his own desires. In short, the disciple fails
to grasp that he can indeed enter into competition with his model and
even become a menace to him. If this is true for adults, how much truer it
must be for the child experiencing his first encounter with mimetic desire!

The model’s very first no—however softly spoken or cautiously
phrased—can easily be mistaken by the disciple for an irrevocable act of
excommunication, a banishment to the realms of outer darkness. Because
the child is incapable of meeting violence with violence and has in fact
had no real experience with violence, his first encounter with the mimetic
double bind may well leave an indelible impression. The “father” projects
into the future the first tentative movements of his son and sees that they
lead straight to the mother or the throne. The incest wish, the patricide
wish, do not belong to the child but spring from the mind of the adult, the
model. In the Oedipus myth it is the oracle that puts such ideas into
Laius’s head, long before Oedipus himself was capable of entertaining any
ideas at all. Freud reinvokes the same ideas, which are no more valid than
Laius’s. The son is always the last to learn that what he desires is incest
and patricide, and it is the hypocritical adults who undertake to enlighten
him in this matter.

The first intervention by the model between the disciple and the object
is a traumatic experience, because the disciple is incapable of performing
the intellectual operation assigned him by the adult, and in particular by
Freud himself. He fails to see the model as a rival and therefore has no
desire to usurp his place. Even the adult disciple is unable to grasp that
conflict with the model is indeed rivalry, is unable to perceive the
symmetry of their situation or acknowledge their basic equality. Faced
with the model’s anger, the disciple feels compelled to make some sort of
choice between himself and the model; and it is perfectly clear that he will
choose in favor of the model. The idol’s wrath must be justified, and it can
only be justified by some failure on the part of the disciple, some hidden
weakness that obliges the god to forbid access to the holy of holies, to slam
shut the gates of paradise. Far from reducing the divinity’s prestige, this
new attitude of vengeful spite serves to increase it. The disciple feels
guilty—though of what, he cannot be sure—and unworthy of the object
of his desire, which now appears more alluring than ever. Desire has now
been redirected toward those particular objects protected by the other's
violence. The link between desire and violence has been forged, and in all
likelihood it will never be broken.

Freud, too, wants to show that an indelible impression is made on the
child when he first discovers his own desires overlapping those of his
parents. But because he eventually rejected the mimetic elements that
had initially intrigued him, he takes a different approach. To appreciate
this difference, let us look again at that crucial passage in Group Psychology
and the Analysis of the Ego: “The little boy notices that his father stands in
his way with his mother. His identification with his father then takes on a
hostile colouring and becomes identical with the wish to replace his father
in regard to his mother as well.”

If we are to believe Freud, the little boy has no difficulty recognizing his
father as a rival—a rival in the old-fashioned theatrical sense, a nuisance,
a hindrance, a terzo incommodo. But even if this rivalry were provoked by
something other than a desire to imitate the father’s desires, a child would
be unaware of this. We have only to look at the numerous everyday
displays of envy and jealousy to realize that even adults never attribute
their mutual antagonisms to that simple phenomenon. Freud is thus con-
ferring on the child powers of discernment not equal but superior to those
of most grown-ups.

Let me make myself clear. I am not objecting to certain basic Freudian
assumptions, such as the attribution to the child of libidinal desires similar
to those of adults, but rather to the bold and surely untenable assertion,
which stands at the very center of his system, that the child is fully aware
of the existing rivalry, of “the hostile colouring.”

Undoubtedly I am flying in the face of psychoanalytical orthodoxy,
denying the alleged evidence of “clinical findings”; and before the doctor’s
scientific mystique the layman can only bow. But the texts we have been
examining are based on no specific “clinical findings.” Their speculative
character is obvious, and there is no more reason to treat them as holy
writ (as some have done) than to try to sweep them under the carpet. In
either case we would be depriving ourselves of some valuable insights
(even if the object of these insights is not always what Freud takes it to be)
and depriving ourselves as well of the fascinating spectacle of Freud’s
intellect at work, of the gradual and halting evolution of Freudian
doctrine.

Undoubtedly “clinical findings” can be turned to almost any account,
but we can hardly expect them to serve as evidence for a consciousness,
no matter how transitory, of patricidal or incestuous desire. After all, it is
precisely because this consciousness refuses to yield to clinical observation
that Freud is obliged to devise such unwieldy and dubious concepts as
those of the “unconscious” or “suppression.”

And here we arrive at my principal complaint against Freud. The
mythical element of Freudianism has nothing to do—despite traditional
assertions to the contrary—with the nonconscious nature of those basic
impulses that determine the individual’s psychological make-up. If my
complaint were a reiteration of that well-worn theme, it would undoubt-
edly be classified among the “reactionary” criticism of Freudianism. In the
final analysis, what I object to most is Freud’s obstinate attachment—
despite all appearances—to a philosophy of consciousness. The mythical
aspect of Freudianism is founded on the conscious knowledge of patricidal
and incestuous desire; only a brief flash of consciousness, to be sure, a
bright wedge of light between the darkness of the first identifications and
the unconscious—but consciousness all the same. Freud’s stubborn
attachment to this consciousness compels him to abandon both logic and
credibility. He first assumes this consciousness and then gets rid of it in a
kind of safe-deposit box, the unconscious. In effect he is saying: ego can
suppress all consciousness of a patricidal and incestuous desire only if at
one time ego truly experienced it. Ergo sum.

The most remarkable aspect of this moment of unobstructed conscious-
ness, which Freud posits as the basis for man’s psychic existence, is its
sheer uselessness. Only by stripping it away do we uncover Freud's essen-
tial point: the crucial and potentially catastrophic nature of the first con-
tacts between child and parent or, in other terms, between the disciple’s
desire and the model’s desire. This moment of consciousness not only
offers us nothing of importance but also serves to obscure the mimetic
process, which in both form and context possesses many advantages over
the Freudian “complex.”

Further discussion along these lines might distract us from our main
subject of inquiry, so I shall only say in passing that I believe that a radic-
ally mimetic conception of desire offers a novel approach to psychiatric
theory, one as far removed from the Freudian unconscious as it is from
any philosophy of consciousness camouflaged as an existential psycho-
analysis. Specifically, this new approach succeeds in circumventing the
fetish of “adjustment” without plunging into the inverse fetish of “perver-
sion” that is typical of so much of modern theory. The individual who
“adjusts” has managed to relegate the two contradictory injunctions of the
double bind—to imitate and not to imitate—to two different domains of
application. That is, he divides reality in such a way as to neutralize the
double bind. This is precisely the procedure of primitive cultures. At the
origin of any individual or collective “adjustment” lies concealed a certain
arbitrary violence. The well-adjusted person is thus one who conceals his
violent impulses and condones the collective’s concealment of them. The
“maladjusted” individual cannot tolerate this concealment. “Mental
illness” and rebellion, like the sacrificial crisis they resemble, commit the
individual to falsehoods and to forms of violence that are certainly more
damaging fo him than the disguised violence channeled through sacrificial
rites but that bring him closer to the heart of the enigma. Many psychic
catastrophes misunderstood by the psychoanalyst result from an incho-
ate, obstinate reaction against the violence and falsehood found in any
human society.

A psychoanalytic system that no longer oscillated between the rigid
conformism of social adjustment and the false scandal arising from the
assumption of a mythical patricide-incest drive in the child would not
result in mere tepid idealism. Rather, such a system would bring us face to
face with some traditional concepts that are troubling, to say the least. For
example, in Greek tragedy, as in the Old Testament, the “good” son
cannot generally be distinguished from the “bad” son; the “good” son is
Jacob rather than Esau, the prodigal son rather than the faithful son,
Oedipus. ... For the good son imitates the father with such passion that
father and son become each other’s chief stumbling block—a situation the
indifferent son more easily avoids.

It may appear, at this point, that all these concerns are foreign to the
Freudian mode of thought and that the mimetic double bind has nothing
to do with Freudian theory. “Act like your model/do not act like your
model’—the contradictory double imperative we see as fundamental—
may be thought to lead us far from the realms of psycho-analysis.

In reality it does not, and this shows that Freud’s work is too precious to
be left to the psychoanalysts. The mimetic approach preserves and
enhances Freud’s most acute insights. In The Ego and the Id Freud explains
that the relation between the ego and the superego “is not exhausted by
the precept: ‘You ought to be like this (like your father).’ It also comprises
the prohibition: ‘You may not be like this (like your father)—that is, you
may not do all that he does; some things are his prerogative . . .’ ”°

Who, after reading this passage, can deny Freud’s proximity to my
mimetic double bind? Not only was he familiar with its operation, but the
context in which he placed it can help us realize its full potential. Freud’s
definition of the superego presupposes something quite different from a
mythical consciousness of rivalry; he seems to have based it on the
model’s identification with the obstacle, an identification unperceived by
the disciple. The superego is in fact nothing more than a resumption of
identification with the father, now appearing chronologically after the
Oedipus complex rather than before it. As we have seen, Freud did not
actually suppress this previous identification, perhaps because he balked
at contradicting himself; but he cunningly relegated it to secondary status
by eliminating its primordial character. In any case, the identification with
the father now operates chiefly after the complex has taken hold; it has
become the superego.

If we reflect on the definition of the superego offered by Freud two facts
become clear. In the first place, the definition accords with the concept of
the double bind. In the second place, it fails to harmonize with Freud’s
picture of a “sublimated” Oedipus complex; that is, a patricide-incest
desire that has been transposed from the conscious to the unconscious.

To appreciate in full the predicament brought about by the superego’s
contradictory commands, issued as they are in the atmosphere of ignor-
ance and uncertainty implied by Freud’s definition, we must try to
imagine the son’s initial act of imitation. It is performed with fervor and
devotion and rewarded by sudden, stupefying disgrace. The positive
injunction, “Be like your father,” had seemed to cover the entire range of
paternal activities. Nothing in this first command anticipates, much less
helps the son to understand, the contradictory command that follows:
“You may not be like your father.” And this command too seems to brook
no exceptions.

All the son’s efforts to differentiate between the commands and to
formulate distinctions end in failure, and his bewilderment gives rise to
terror. He wonders what he has done wrong and struggles to find separate
areas of application for the two commands. He finds it difficult to see
where he is at fault—certainly he has broken no law yet known to him—
so he applies himself to discovering some new law that will allow him to
define his conduct as illegal.

What conclusions must be drawn from this definition of the superego?
Why did Freud again toy with the mimetic effects that he had rejected at
the Oedipal stage? There seems only one possible answer: he had no
intention of renouncing the mimetic effects resulting from identification.
For he reverts to them when he takes up the concept of the superego. Yet
the definition of the superego follows almost immediately on the
definition of the Oedipus complex previously quoted, a definition purged
of the mimetic elements that had characterized Freud’s earlier definition
in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego.

It seems possible, then, to follow the evolution of Freud’s thought from
Group Psychology in 1921 to The Ego and the Id in 1923. In the earlier work
Freud believed it possible to reconcile the mimetic effect with his main
thesis, the Oedipus complex; that is why observations on the mimetic
phenomenon are sprinkled throughout this work. But in the very course
of composition, it seems, Freud began to sense the incompatibility of the
two themes. And this incompatibility quickly becomes all too clear. The
mimetic process detaches desire from any predetermined object, whereas
the Oedipus complex fixes desire on the maternal object. The mimetic
concept eliminates all conscious knowledge of patricide-incest, and even
all desire for it as such; the Freudian proposition, by contrast, is based
entirely on a consciousness of this desire.

Freud evidently decided to permit himself the luxury of his Oedipus
complex. When he had to choose between the mimetic concept and a
full-blown patricide-incest drive, he opted firmly for the latter. This is not
to say that he renounced exploring the promising possibilities of mimesis;
the admirable thing about Freud is his refusal ever to renounce anything.
In suppressing the effects of mimesis he was simply trying to prevent
mimesis from subverting his own cherished version of the Oedipus myth.
He wanted to get hold of the “Oedipus complex” once and for all so as to
be free to return to the mimesis question. Once he had the complex
behind him, he could take mimesis up where he had left it before the
burgeoning of the idea of the complex.

In short, Freud attempted initially to develop the Oedipus complex on
the basis of a desire that is both object-oriented (cathectic) and yet origin-
ates in mimesis—whence comes the strange duality of the identification
with the father and the libidinous attraction for the mother in the first,
and even the second, version of the complex. The failure of this attempt at
compromise compelled Freud to base his complex on a purely cathectic
desire and to reserve the mimetic effect for another psychic structure, the
superego.

The duality of Freud’s position stems from his effort to separate two
poles of his thinking on desire: cathectic and Oedipal at one extreme,
mimetic at the other. But any attempt to sever the link between the two
will end in failure, as did the attempt at synthesis that preceded it.

It is hopeless to attempt to isolate the three elements of mimetic desire:
identification, choice of object, and rivalry. That Freud’s thought was
never free of the influence of mimetic preoccupations can be proved by
the irresistible conjunction of these three elements; whenever any one of
them appears, the other two are sure to follow. It was only with the
greatest effort and at the expense of much of his credibility that Freud
managed to rid his Oedipus complex of all traces of mimesis. Conversely,
in the case of the superego, where in principle nothing interferes with the
son’s paternal identification, we witness once again an upsurge of rivalry
for the mother object. When the superego proclaims, “You may not be like
this (your father) ... some things are his prerogative,” Freud is clearly
referring to the mother. That is why he adds: “This double aspect of the
ego ideal derives from the fact that the ego ideal had the task of repressing
the Oedipus complex; indeed it is to that revolutionary event that it owes
its existence.”’

This superego, simultaneously repressing and repressed, which only
exists thanks to “that revolutionary event,” poses a formidable problem. It
knows too much, even in a negative sense. The truth is that the reactivat-
ing of the father-identification, which gives the superego its meaning,
automatically reactivates the Oedipal triangle. As I have remarked, Freud
cannot evoke one of the three elements of the mimetic configuration
without the other two’s putting in an appearance. The reappearance of
the Oedipal triangle was not in his program. The Oedipus complex,
the capital that served to launch the entire psycho-analytic enterprise, is
supposed to be firmly locked away in the unconscious, deposited deep in
the vaults of the psyche.

This inopportune reappearance of the Oedipal triangle compelled Freud
to admit that the son might experience certain difficulties in repressing his
Oedipus complex! In fact, it is Freud himself who was having trouble
disposing of the mimetic triangle. Haunted by the mimetic rivalry, he
repeatedly sketched out triangular formations he believed to represent his
complex, whereas in fact they depict a constantly thwarted mimesis—an
interplay of model and obstacle that lingers at the edge of his thought but
that he never succeeds in articulating fully.

I limited myself to examining two or three passages whose comparison
seems particularly revealing; other passages could have been chosen that
would have suited my purposes equally well, including some from the so-
called clinical cases. In my chosen passages a term fundamental to Freudian
speculation—ambivalence—reappears at frequent intervals. It seems to me
that this term testifies to the existence of the mimetic pattern in Freud’s
mind and to his inability to express correctly the relationship among the
three elements of the structure: the model, the disciple, and the object that
is disputed by both because the model’s desire has made the object desir-
able to the disciple. The object represents a desire shared by both, and such
sharing leads not to harmony, as one might suppose, but to bitter conflict.

The term ambivalence appears toward the close of the two definitions of
the Oedipus complex previously quoted. Here are the passages again:

His [the boy’s] identification with the father takes on a hostile colouring and
becomes identical with the wish to replace the father in regard to his mother as
well. Identification, in fact, is ambivalent from the very first.

His identification with his father takes on a hostile colouring and changes
into a wish to get rid of his father in order to take his place with his
mother. Henceforward his relation to his father is ambivalent; it seems as if the
ambivalence inherent in the identification from the beginning had become
manifest.

When we recall how the identification with the father is initially
presented—*This behavior has nothing to do with a passive or feminine
attitude towards his father ...”—we seem to be dealing with a unified
relationship, free of ambiguity. Why then does Freud, a few lines later and
seemingly as an afterthought, attribute an underlying ambiguity to this
identification? Simply because he now senses (and his intuition does not
betray him) that the positive feelings resulting from the first identifica-
tion—imitation, admiration, veneration—are fated to change into negative
sentiments: despair, guilt, resentment. But Freud does not realize why
such things must happen. He does not realize because he cannot accept a
concept of desire based on mimesis; he cannot openly acknowledge the
model in the identification to be a model of the desire itself, and thus a
powerful force of opposition.

Whenever he encounters the effects inherent in mimetic desire and
finds himself struggling vainly to formulate its mechanism of rivalry,
Freud takes refuge in the idea of ambivalence. To label these effects
as ambivalent is to confine them to a solipsistic context, a traditional
philosophic subject, instead of identifying them as a fundamental trait of
all human relations, the universal double bind of imitated desires. If we
try to grasp these effects of mimetic desire as individual pathology or
psychology, they become utterly incomprehensible; in consequence, we
ascribe them to “physical” causes. Freud himself conveys this impression
and managed to persuade himself that in using the term ambivalence he
had made a daring plunge into the dark regions where the psychic and the
somatic meet. In reality, he was simply refusing to decipher a perfectly
decipherable message. And because the “physical” is by nature mute, no
rebuttal is possible. Today everyone imagines himself tuned in to the
“physical,” able to decode the body’s messages after the example of Freud.
Yet in all Freud’s work there is not a single example of “ambivalence” that
does not have its origins in the obstacle-model.

To attribute the conflict to the “body” is to give up on the logic of
mimetic desire that can account most intelligibly and economically for all
phenomena. With Freud, the “physical” aspect of the subject, the corpor-
eal regions of the psyche, are endowed with a more or less organic pro-
pensity to run head on into the obstacle of the model-desire. Ambivalence
becomes the main virtue of physicality insofar as it nourishes the psyche;
it becomes the virtus dormitiva of modern scholasticism in the face of
desire. Thanks to this idea and a number of others, psychoanalysis has
been able to grant a reprieve—even apparently to grant new life—to the
myth of the individual, by reasserting the claims of physicality. Yet this is
the very myth it should be trying to demolish.

Freud’s use of the term ambivalence reveals a genuine, if very limited,
recognition of mimetic desire—which is more than can be said for many
of his followers. The interesting question is how Freud managed repeat-
edly to misconstrue such a simple mechanism. In a sense its very
simplicity served to camouflage its presence; but there is something else at
work here as well.

That something else is not difficult to identify; we have encountered it
at every turn in the course of our inquiry. It is, of course, the hard core
of the Oedipus complex: that brief interval of consciousness when the
patricide-incest desire is felt to become a formal expression of the child’s
intentions. It is clear that this Freudian view makes Freud’s full
discovery of mimetic desire impossible. To persuade himself that the
patricide-incest desire actually exists, Freud was obliged to disregard the
model, insofar as it is responsible for awakening the desire and designat-
ing the object. Freud was forced to perpetuate a traditional, retrogressive
concept of the desire. The drift of his thought in the direction of mimesis
was perpetually checked by his strange loyalty to the patricide-incest
motif.

As an interpretative tool the concept of mimetic rivalry is far more
serviceable than the Freudian complex. By eliminating the conscious
patricide-incest desire it does away with the cumbersome necessity of the
desire’s subsequent repression. In fact, it does away with the unconscious.
The concept explains the Oedipus myth and does so with an economy and
precision lacking in the Freudian approach. Why then, we may well ask,
did Freud renounce the superior utility of mimetic desire to lavish his
attention on the poor substitute of patricide-incest?

Even if lam mistaken—even if I am blind to the virtues of the Oedipus
myth as a universal model for the human psyche—still my question
remains valid. It seems unlikely that Freud ever formally rejected the
interpretation I am proposing here as a substitute for his complex; in all
likelihood, it never came to his attention. Had it done so, Freud would
surely have taken it under consideration, if only to reject it. My reading
brings together a number of clues that seem to play little part in Freud’s
texts; the obstacle of the patricide-incest motif once removed, we can
bring together elements that remain disconnected in Freud’s own work.
Freud was dazzled by what he took to be his crucial discovery. Loyalty to
this discovery kept him from forging ahead on the path of mimesis. Had he
done so he would have come to realize the mythic nature of the patricide-
incest motif, as it appears in the Oedipus myth and in psychoanalysis as
well.

The whole of psychoanalysis seems to be summed up in the patricide-
incest theme. It is this theme that has won psychoanalysis its glory and its
notoriety, that has provoked the incomprehension, hostility, and extra-
ordinary devotion we have come to associate with the discipline. It is this
theme that is invariably invoked whenever any rebellious spirit dares to
cast doubt on the efficacy of psychoanalytic doctrine.

Freud's intimations of mimetic desire never crystallized into a theory.
The founder of psychoanalysis brooded over the same themes throughout
his lifetime, and his unending struggle to reorganize the elements of
desire never produced truly satisfactory results, because he refused to
abandon his object desire, his “cathectic” viewpoint. The various struc-
tures and examples of Freudianism, theoretical concepts such as the
castration complex, the Oedipus complex, the superego, the unconscious,
repression, ambivalence—all these are nothing more than defensive
positions in his eternal battle to resolve the problem of desire.

Freudian analysis should not be regarded as a fully articulated system,
but as a series of experiments dealing almost invariably with the same
subject. The superego, for instance, is only a recasting of the Oedipus
complex; the more I examine the origins of the two concepts, the more
convinced I become that their differences are purely illusory.

Freud at his best is no more “Freudian” than Marxat his best is “Marxist.”
Nevertheless, uncomprehending critics did on occasion provoke him to
adopt a dogmatic line of argument that his followers blindly accepted and
his opponents as blindly rejected, therefore making it difficult for any of
us to approach these texts with an open mind.

Post-Freudian psychoanalysis has clearly perceived what must be done
to systematize Freudianism—or rather, to sever it from its living roots. To
assure the autonomy of desire it is only necessary to erase the last traces of
mimesis from the Oedipus complex. Thus, the identification with the
father must be dropped. Freud had already pointed the way, after all, in
The Ego and the Id. Inversely, to establish the supremacy of the superego on
a firm basis, one need only eliminate all those elements that tend to impli-
cate the object and the subject of rivalry in its definition. In short, the
post-Freudian psychoanalyst reasserts a system, an order of things based
on “common sense,” such as only Freud himself ever challenged. In the
case of the Oedipus complex the father becomes a disgraced rival; thus
there is no question of his being a venerated model. Reciprocally, in the
case of the superego, the father is the venerated model, with no trace of
the disgraced rival about him. Ambivalence, it would appear, is good for
patients, but of no use to psychoanalysts.

We are presented, therefore, with a rivalry devoid of preliminary
identification (the Oedipus complex) followed by an identification with-
out subsequent rivalry (the superego). In one of his earliest articles,
“Aggression in Psychoanalysis,” Jacques Lacan noted the bewildering
character of this sequence: “The structural effect of the identification with
the rival does not follow naturally, except perhaps in mythic thinking.”*
But let us leave the myth aside; we will presently see that it can take care
of itself. Moreover, the effect noted by Lacan makes perfect sense in terms
of the mimetic nature of desire, which Lacan, too, failed to discover,
forced as he was by his linguistic fetishism to reinforce the more rigid and
“structural” aspects of Freudian thinking.

The interest of Freudian analysis does not lie in its results, in its
pretentious accumulation of psychic agencies; nor does it lie in the spec-
tacle of Freudian apprentices clambering up and down the precarious
scaffolding of Freudian doctrine with an agility as remarkable as it is futile.
It lies, paradoxically enough, in the ultimate inadequacies of the whole
system. Freud never succeeded in establishing the precise relationship of
the model, the disciple, and their common object, although he never
entirely abandoned the effort. Whenever he attempted to manipulate any
two of the terms, the third raised its head like a mocking jack-in-the-box,
which his disciples made haste to cram back in its box in the belief that
they were doing something useful. In fact, it is hard to imagine a more
effective method of “castrating” the Master!

Since Freud’s time it has often been disputed whether the Oedipus
complex is a phenomenon exclusive to the Occidental world or whether
it is also to be found in primitive societies. Malinowski’s The Father in
Primitive Society has been cited in this context.

Malinowski begins by asserting that the Trobrianders are happier than
Occidentals. Yet these savages, while free of the conflicts and tensions of
civilization, are beset by conflicts and tensions of their own. In Trobriander
society the maternal uncle performs some of the functions that in our
society are allotted to the father. It is from the uncle rather than the father
that the children inherit their worldly goods; it is the uncle who is respon-
sible for their tribal education. We should not be surprised, therefore, to
observe that conflicts and tensions arise between children and uncle
rather than between children and father and that in time of stress the
father functions as a source of comfort and protection, as an indulgent and
well-disposed comrade.’

Malinowski himself presents his observations in the context of a
dialogue with Freud. The impression they leave is unclear. The author
begins by contradicting Freud’s assertion that the Oedipus complex is
universal. His reflections on the status of the uncle follow, seeming to cast
a more favorable light on psychoanalytic theory. Malinowski no longer
appears to be questioning Freud, but rather to be filling out his theories.
The uncle’s position in Trobriander society is analogous to the father’s
position in Western society, and in this sense the Oedipus complex could
be said to partake of a certain universality.

Psychoanalysts have accorded Malinowski’s work a warm reception.
They see it as a refutation of the anthropologists who have accused
psychoanalysis of parochialism, but they fail to notice that Malinowski,
whose Freudianism is rather superficial, refers only to an explicit and fully
conscious conflict between children and their Trobriander uncles. There is
nothing here, on the psychoanalytic level, that allows us to declare these
conflicts to be rooted in an unconscious drama whose protagonist is the
uncle himself. It is scarcely likely that this omission would have gone
unnoticed had the work been unfavorable to psychoanalysis.

Some of Malinowski’s observations seem vital to the present discussion.
They address themselves directly to relationships that are of particular
interest to us and that are the only real aspect of the Oedipus complex.
Without fully appreciating the significance of his own remarks, Malinowski
demonstrates that primitive societies (or at any rate, Trobriander society)
employ methods for combating mimetic rivalry and the double bind that
are totally foreign to our own culture. The essential factor here is not the
father’s indulgence or the uncle’s severity, not the displacement of
authority from one masculine image to another; rather, it is the cleavage
made between father and son, the fact that the father, and paternal
culture in general, does not serve as a model.

Father and son do not belong to the same lineage. The father never
commands the son: “Do as I do!”

The child .. . learns that the place where his kada (mother’s brother) resides is
also his, the child’s, “own village”; that there he has his property and his other
rights of citizenship; that there are his future prospects, there reside his natural
allies and associates. He may even be taunted in the village of his birth with
being an “outsider”. ... Thus the life of a Trobriander runs under a twofold
influence—a duality which must not be imagined only as a mere surface play
of custom. It enters deeply into the existence of individual men, it produces
strange complications of usage, it creates frequent tensions and difficulties.

The sons live with a man—their father—who does not incorporate
their ideal in the Freudian sense of the “ideal ego” or the “superego.”
Such an ideal is indeed provided by the culture in the form of the closest
adult relative in the maternal line, but the children do not live with this
model. To begin with, the maternal uncle intervenes rather late in the
childrens’ existence, and even then his presence is only intermittent, for
he usually lives in another village. Moreover, and most importantly,
there is a very strict taboo denying him any contact with his sister, the
mother of the children. So in Freudian terms, as well as in those of the
double bind, the displacement toward the uncle is illusory. The avuncular
Oedipus complex, then, turns out to be little more than a whimsy. In fact,
the tensions that exist between uncle and nephew are the more explicit
because the child is not torn by contradictory feelings; for him, the
obstacle cannot become the model nor the model the obstacle. The
mimesis is channeled in such a way that desire will not take its own
obstacle as an object.

The study of other primitive systems would probably reveal that, in
those instances where the cultural model is incarnated in a specific indi-
vidual, the model’s sphere of activity never impinges on that of the
disciple so as to produce a convergence of their two desires. In fact, the
two spheres of activity only touch at those points and at those predeter-
mined moments that are necessary to ensure the disciple’s initiation into
the culture.

Malinowski’s observations give us reason to believe that primitive soci-
eties cope with the double bind more effectively than does Western soci-
ety. Indeed, how can we define Western society in terms relevant to the
Trobrianders. In our society, ever since the time of the ancient patriarchs,
a plurality of functions, which among the Trobrianders are divided
between father and uncle, have been assigned to one man alone. Our
patriarchal system is less differentiated than the Trobriander system, and
even though it can and must appear to us, from the point of view of the
modern family, as the extreme of arbitrary structuralization, from the
perspective of primitive societies it would be regarded as the opposite.

Surely we should abandon the use of the “Oedipus complex,” a
seemingly inexhaustible source of confusion. We could then bring into
conjunction with conflictual mimesis those entirely genuine phenomena
that psychoanalysis has explained by its “Oedipus complex.” These
phenomena would gain in coherence; moreover, it would become pos-
sible to incorporate them into a diachronic plan, to situate historically not
only the phenomena themselves but also the theories that have been
proposed to explain them—beginning, of course, with psychoanalysis
itself.

A theoretical concept such as the Oedipus complex can only be applied
to a society in which reciprocal mimesis has already been established and
the model-obstacle mechanism set in motion, but its violent effects not yet
generally felt. In addition, this mechanism must usually be triggered by
the father. If the double bind originates with the father, the mimetic
attraction will preserve its paternal coloring as long as the victim lives.
With the individual as with groups, mimetic attraction always becomes
more and more acute, it always tends to reproduce its initial forms; in
other terms, it always seeks new models—and new obstacles—that
resemble the original one. If this original model is the father, the subject
will choose models that resemble him.


In Western society, the father had already become the model by the
patriarchal era. In order for the double bind to operate, he had also to
become the obstacle. And the father can only become an obstacle when
the diminution of his paternal authority has brought him into a direct
confrontation with his son, obliging him to occupy the same sphere. The
Oedipus complex appears most plausible in a society in which the father’s
authority has been greatly weakened but not completely destroyed; that
is, in Western society during the course of recent centuries. Here the
father has functioned as the original model and the original obstacle in a
world where the dissolution of differences encourages the proliferation of
the double bind.

This state of affairs requires an explanation. If the history of modern
society is marked by the dissolution of differences, that clearly has some-
thing to do with the sacrificial crisis to which we have repeatedly referred.
Indeed, the phrase “modern world” seems almost like a synonym for
“sacrificial crisis.” It should be noted, however, that the modern world
manages to retain its balance, precarious though it may be; and the
methods it employs to do so, though extreme, are not so extreme as to
destroy the fabric of the society. As my previous chapters indicated, primi-
tive societies are unable to withstand such pressures; violence would
quickly get out of hand and trigger the mechanism of generative unanim-
ity, thus restoring a social system based on multiple and sharply pro-
nounced differences. In the modern Western world nothing of this kind
takes place. The wearing away of differences proceeds at a slow but steady
pace, and the results are absorbed more or less gracefully by a community
that is slowly but steadily coming to encompass the entire globe.

It is not law, in any conceivable form, that is responsible for the tensions
and alienation besetting modern man; rather, it is the increasing lack of
law. The perpetual denunciation of the law arises from a typically modern
sense of resentment—a feedback of desire that purports to be directed
against the law but one that is actually aimed at the model-obstacle whose
dominant position the subject stubbornly refuses to acknowledge. The
more frenzied the mimetic process becomes, caught up in the confusion of
constantly changing forms, the more unwilling men are to recognize that
they have made an obstacle of the model and a model of the obstacle.
Here we encounter a true “unconscious,” and one that can obviously
assume many forms.

Freud is of little use as a guide over this terrain. So, for that matter, is
Nietzsche, who reserves his resentment for the “weak” while trying vainly
to establish a distinction between this resentment and a truly
“spontaneous” desire, a will to power that he can claim as wholly his own
but that is in reality nothing more than the ultimate expression of cumu-
lative resentment. No, our best guide is perhaps Kafka, one of the few to
perceive that the absence of law is in fact identical with law run wild and
that this identity constitutes the chief burden of mankind. Once more our
best guide turns out to be one of those writers of fiction whose insights
have been studiously ignored by psychological researchers. When the
father is no longer an overbearing patriarch the son looks everywhere for
the law—and finds no lawgiver.

If the patriarchal system, when compared to primitive systems, seems to
represent a “lesser” degree of structuralization, then Western civilization
since the decline of the patriarchal system can be said to have been gov-
ered by a principle of decreasing structuralization or destructralization
during the whole of its historical course—a tendency that can almost be
seen as an ultimate aim. A dynamic force seems to be drawing first Western
society, then the rest of the world, toward a state of relative indifferentia-
tion never before known on earth, a strange kind of nonculture or
anticulture we call modern.

The advent of psychoanalysis has been historically determined by
the advent of the “modern.” Most of the phenomena associated with the
Oedipus complex reveal a true unity and intelligibility when seen in the
light of the mimetic process—and this remains true even if the main body
of belief is purely mythical. The Oedipus complex might seem to be a
satisfactory theory during the early stages of mimetic propagation in
a historical situation characterized by the limited survival, at least for a
while, of family structures derived from the patriarchal system. We can
witness here the same process of disintegration that takes place in primi-
tive societies during the sacrificial crisis, but in this case the process is
gradual, kept more or less in rein, with no catastrophic outbursts of
violence and no resolution of any kind taking place. The astonishing flexi-
bility of the “modern,” along with its extraordinary functionalism, is here
on view. Equally visible are the ever-increasing tensions that beset
modern times.

The Oedipus complex is a Western and modern phenomenon, as are the
relative neutralization and sterilization of a mimetic desire that, though in
the process of freeing itself, is still oriented toward the father and there-
fore inclined toward certain forms of order and stability. Psychoanalysis at
this particular moment in history seems at once to announce and to
prepare the way for something it cannot itself describe: an advanced
stage of indifferentiation, or “decoding,” which involves the complete
effacement of the paternal function.

Like all forms of mythical thought, psychoanalysis is a closed system
that can never be refuted. If there is no conflict between father and son, it
is because the unconscious aspect of the complex has come into play; and
if there is a conflict, that too is a result of the complex. In short, the
complex is bound to appear, and if it does not, that circumstance only
confirms its existence.

Not only can the teachings of psychoanalysis always be confirmed, but
they seem increasingly to the point as mimesis spreads and grows more
acute, as destructuralization becomes more widespread and the double
bind proliferates. The Oedipus complex waxes as the father wanes. It has
become routine to ascribe all sorts of psychic disorders to an Oedipus
whose Laius remains obstinately out of sight. The need to trace the com-
plex to some flesh-and-blood father, or uncle, or any one individual at all,
is now said to be illusory; as indeed it is. Psychoanalysis vanquishes all
challengers. It is everywhere—and nowhere. It finally dissolves into the
banality of multisided familial and nonfamilial rivalries in a more and
more competitive world.

If the Oedipus complex constitutes an erroneous reading of the double
bind, then we can say that those desires that the world at large, and the
father in particular, regard as emanating from the son’s own patricide-
incest drive actually derive from the father himself in his role as model.

The Freudian myth is still so influential today, even among skeptics that
the foregoing statement may well seem like sheer perversity. I feel con-
strained, therefore, to seek support from a reputable author whose
authority in these matters is generally acknowledged: Sophocles. We
could, of course, turn once more to Oedipus the King, but that play has been
used so often and for so many purposes that its value as an example has
worn thin. Let us rather consider a less familiar play: The Women of Trachis.

In the last episode, Heracles, the protagonist, has put on his poisoned
tunic and lies writhing in agony on the ground. His son Hyllos stands by,
respectfully awaiting his father’s last orders. Heracles orders his son to
light a great fire and place him, still living, on the pyre; thus Heracles will
be free of his pain. Hyllos cries out in protest; his father is making a
patricide of him! Heracles insists in such a manner as to make himself
responsible for the act, responsible for perpetrating a ruthless double bind:

Heracles: Do as I say, for this must be done. Or else, cease to call yourself my
son.

Hyllos: Oh father, what are you asking of me? To be your murderer, to assume
the guilt of your death!

What follows is even more extraordinary. Heracles has a second favor,
less important than the first, to ask of his son—and at this point the play
takes on a distinctly comic air, at any rate for modern ears attuned to
Freudian motifs. Because his death leaves his young wife Iole (acquired in
the course of the last labor) without a protector, Heracles makes a
proposal to his son:

Heracles: When I am dead, if you wish to show your piety and stand by the
vows made to your father, make her [Iole] your wife. Do not deny me
this. She has slept at my side, and it is my wish that no one but you possess
her. Go, take her to your bed. What good is it if you carry out my greater
commands, and neglect the lesser ones like this?

Hyllos: Ah, it is wrong to lose one’s temper at a sick man, yet how hard it is to
put up with him when he has such ideas!

After this exchange, not unworthy of a post-Freudian Moliére, the dia-
logue continues to gain in interest. Hyllos offers as his reason for refusing
Iole the role she has played—though only as passive spectator—in the
family tragedy that is now drawing to a close. In fact, it is the true relation-
ship between the father’s desire and the son’s desire that is being chal-
lenged; an identification that appears as impious rebellion to the world at
large, although it is in fact an absolute submission to the paternal com-
mand, to the insidious and imperious suggestion by the paternal model
that the son desire what the father desires.

Hyllos: Father, have pity on me, Iam the most wretched of men!

Heracles: Because you refuse to obey your father.

Hyllos: But when you preach impiety to your son!

Heracles: There can be no impiety in your pleasing me.

Hyllos: Then these are your final orders?

Heracles: They are; and the gods are my witnesses.

Hyllos: Then I will obey. For the gods know it is your will; and surely a son does
no wrong in obeying his father.

Heracles: Then allis well...

As we can see, the ancient drama is more knowledgeable in the ways
of fathers and sons than is modern psychoanalytic theory. It provides
modern theorists with a lesson in humility. For Sophocles, speaking
over the span of twenty-five centuries, can help us to cast off that most
burdensome of all mythologies: the myth of the Oedipus complex."

Notes

1 Sigmund Freud, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, ed. and trans. James Strachey, 24 vols. (London, 1953-66),
vol. 18, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, p. 105.

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid.

4 Freud, Standard Edition, vol. 19, The Ego and the Id, pp. 31-32.

5 Because the very notion of “mental illness” has been, up to a point, correctly
challenged in the writings of some contemporary physicians, I put the term in
quotation marks.

6 Freud, The Ego and the Id, p. 32.

7 Ibid.

8 Jacques Lacan, Ecrits (Paris, 1966), p. 117.

9 Malinowski, The Father in Primitive Society, pp. 17-18.

10 Ibid., pp.18-19.

11 This is perhaps the place to call attention to the signal perceptiveness of other
purely “literary” works that touch upon the same subject. On the question of
paternal incitement to patricide, Calderon’s remarkable La Vida es sueno
merits special attention. See also Cesareo Bandera’s highly original study
Mimesis conflictiva (Madrid: Gredos, 1975). This study reveals Calderon as an
author who goes one step beyond Freud in dealing with the question of desire
and the obstacle that masquerades as the “law.”


Totem and Taboo and the Incest Prohibition


Contemporary criticism is almost unanimous in finding unacceptable the
theories set forth in Totem and Taboo. Freud assumes at the outset the very
propositions his book is supposed to explore: Darwin’s primal horde is a
caricature of the family, and the sexual monopoly of the dominant male
coincides with future prohibitions regarding incest. As Lévi-Strauss
remarks in The Elementary Structures of Kinship, we have here “a vicious
circle deriving the social state from events which presuppose it.”’

This objection has validity if one considers the work only in its broad
outlines. Still, there are aspects of Totem and Taboo that elude categoriza-
tion. And although one might assume that the theory of collective
murder, for example, presented in the work has been amply clarified by
the critics, such is not the case. To be sure, the subject of collective murder
invariably crops up in connection with the book; indeed, it seems to con-
stitute the main attraction of this work, this bizarre edifice through which
we are guided by glib commentators who seem, one and all, to have the
same story to tell; Totem and Taboo, they assure us, is an example of the
aberrations to which genius is prone! These commentators see the work
either as an anomaly or as an unwitting farce—something like the novels
of Victor Hugo’s old age.

A reexamination of the work in question confirms our uneasiness. The
murder motif is conspicuous, but it serves no apparent purpose. If the
subject of the book is the genesis of sexual prohibitions, then this motif
hinders Freud’s argument rather than helps it. Without the murder motif,
we could pass easily from the sexual privations inflicted on the young by a
primordial father to the strictly cultural prohibitions. But the murder
breaks the circuit, and while Freud tries dutifully to restore the connection,
he does so without conviction. Ultimately his ideas on the subject of
sexual prohibitions are both more confused and less simplistic than has
been generally acknowledged.

Far from serving to “put things in order,” the murder motif seems to
throw everything into disarray. The theory that attributes the prohibitions
to the father’s sexual monopoly is not Freud’s invention, as Freud himself
makes plain:

Atkinson (1903) seems to have been the first to realize that the practical
consequence of the conditions obtaining in Darwin’s primal horde might be
exogamy for the young males. Each of them might, after being driven out,
establish a similar horde, in which the same prohibition upon sexual inter-
course would rule owing to its leader’s jealousy. In course of time this would
produce what grew into a conscious law: “No sexual relations between those
who share a common home.” After the establishment of totemism this regula-
tion would assume another form and would run: “No sexual relations within
the totem.”?

The concept of collective murder, however, undoubtedly originates
with Freud. Its apparent superfluousness and incongruity has prompted
critics to wonder why Freud included it at all, and French psychoanalysts
have responded to the question in their customary fashion by attributing
the concept to the author’s unconscious. In Totem and Taboo, they inform
us, Freud treats his readers to a particularly spectacular revelation of his
own repressed desires. And although this is the sort of response we have
learned to expect from Freud’s followers, it is slightly disconcerting to
find it applied to the master himself. Of all Freud’s works, Totem and Taboo
is the only one thus singled out for therapeutic treatment, the only
one for which such a treatment is not only permitted, but apparently
encouraged.

Freudians are generally prompt to pay obeisance to the least utterance
of their oracle and to denounce in violent terms the most tentative ques-
tioning of his conclusions.’ A summary condemnation of Totem and Taboo
must make a strong impression on the lay observer, who can only
conclude that this particular work must have been very badly botched
indeed.

Modem ethnologists, although generally kinder to amateurs than are
their colleagues in the field of psychoanalysis, have shown themselves
equally severe toward Totem and Taboo. The work was published in 1913,
when ethnology was still a fledgling science. The theories drawn on by
Freud—Frazer’s, and in particular Robertson Smith’s—have long been
superseded. The concept of totemism is virtually obsolete; and above all,
Freud’s main thesis is patently false.

In short, there are so many excellent reasons for condemning Totem and
Taboo that the work has never received serious critical examination. Yet if
it is true that Freud lost his head in the writing of this essay, surely it is
worthwhile to determine how, why, and to what extent he went astray.
The greater one’s esteem for Freud’s genius, the more valid such an
inquiry appears. The accusations leveled at Totem and Taboo must cast
doubt on Freud’s other theories as well—at any rate, until the Freudians
succeed in localizing the difficulty and correcting it. But this is precisely
what certain neo-Freudians fail—indeed refuse—to undertake. The
antireferential prejudice is so strong that it has become second nature.

True scientific inquiry is always open to disquieting speculations, to
theories that flatly contradict the beliefs of the moment or challenge their
most cherished conventions. But perhaps it is misleading to speak of “dis-
quieting” theories; we should rather refer to theories of varying degrees of
credibility. Before accusing Freud of succumbing to his illusions—as if he
were a mere fiction-maker—a Shakespeare or a Sophocles or a Euripides—
let us at least give him a hearing. It is strange that the very people who
claim to represent the living spirit of psychoanalysis dismiss Freud the
most flippantly.

Everyone seems intent on covering Totem and Taboo with obloquy and
condemning it to oblivion. My own attitude toward the book is obviously
quite different. Freud’s concept of collective murder and the arguments
he uses to present it are too close to the themes of my own work for me to
pass over the book in silence.

It is important to bear in mind that an ethnological theory can be justly
criticized, even conclusively refuted, without invalidating the evidence
collected in its defence. Although totemism has been shown to be only
one facet of a far broader form of activity—that of classification—it does
not necessarily follow that the religious phenomena that were previously
explained by totemism are now to be considered null and void. These
phenomena must simply be considered in a broader context; our concern
should now be directed to the relationship between religion and the
overall question of classification. That distinctions should exist or that
these distinctions should remain stable cannot be taken for granted from
the standpoint of primitive societies. Totemism may indeed be illusory,
but this illusion served to focus attention on the enigma of religious
belief.

Freud was fully aware of the risks involved in selecting totemism as the
rallying point for his arguments. Far from placing a blind trust in the
concept, he scrutinized his results with a critical eye and concluded that
“everything connected with totemism seems to be puzzling.”* He found
none of the proposed solutions to his liking, including the one he qualified
as “nominalism,” which, when carried to its logical conclusions, has led to
the contemporary refutation of the entire concept: “The [nominalist]
theories I have so far discussed ... might perhaps explain the fact
that primitive peoples adopt animal names for their clans, but they could
never explain the importance that has become attached to this
nomenclature—namely, the totemic system.’

What is important here is not the reference to the totem or to any other
system, but the religious presence, which must not be casually and
fraudulently dismissed as something that “goes without saying.” It is no
part of the role of science to deprive the spirit of the justifiable sense of
wonderment that is occasioned by certain human acts. Freud rejected all
those “too rational” points of view that “fail to take into account the
affective side of things.”

Freud’s attention was caught by the same kinds of acts—in some
instances actually by the identical acts—that I have presented in the pre-
ceding chapters. He observed that in primitive religion extreme opposites
coincide: good and evil, sadness and joy, accepted and forbidden practices.
The festival, for example, is “a permitted, or rather an obligatory, excess, a
solemn breach of a prohibition.”*® The coincidence of the permitted and
the prohibited brings to mind the sacrificial process: “when the deed is
done, the slaughtered animal is lamented and bewailed. . . .” This is hardly
surprising, because sacrifice and festival are one and the same rite. “There
is no gathering of a clan without an animal sacrifice, nor—and this
now becomes significant—any slaughter of an animal except on these
ceremonial occasions.””

The same mingling of the permitted and the prohibited is found in the
treatment of certain animals, even when the sacrificial element is not
formally present: “A totem animal that is found dead is mourned and
buried like a dead kinsman. If it is necessary to kill a totem animal, this is
done according to a prescribed ritual of apologies and ceremonies of
expiation.”*

Freud discerns this strange duality of sacrificial custom in all aspects
of primitive religion. The rite is invariably presented in the form of a
murder, a transgression both culpable and obligatory whose virtue lies
ultimately in its very impiety.

Robertson Smith clearly perceived the unifying factors in those
practices that, broadly speaking, correspond to our “sacrificial rites” and
that he chose to group under the heading “totemism.” The term had a
great vogue among ethnologists who shared a particular body of know-
ledge, as well as certain intellectual attitudes that no longer seem valid.
But if we do not always agree with their concepts, we approve of
their quest: to fathom the hidden meaning of primitive religions and to
establish their essential unity.

It is this quest for unity that led Robertson Smith, and later Freud, to
propose totemism as the origin of all religious manifestations. These
so-called totemic beliefs serve to direct our attention to some extraordi-
nary manifestations of religious belief, customs at once paradoxical and
enigmatic that seem to demand a full interpretation and that are, there-
fore, the most likely to lead us toward the truth. It was in the aspects of
totemism that dealt specifically with religion that Freud found, far more
conspicuously than elsewhere, that coincidence of opposites that serves to
define the overall process of religion. Religious totemism is connected
with the operation in which violence, caught up in its own paroxysm,
produces an inversion by means of an actual act of collective murder.
Freud astutely surmised the necessity for this act, but because the mech-
anism of the surrogate victim eluded him, he failed to grasp its modus
operandi.

This mechanism provides the only feasible explanation of how a
sacrificial murder, originally regarded as a crime, can literally be trans-
formed into an act of piety. There seems to be a very close connection, if
not an essential similarity, between this transformation and the clans’
individual attitudes toward their totems. In many instances the pursuit of
the totem, its slaughter and devouring, are expressly restricted to those
solemn festivals that seem to involve a somewhat equivocal inversion of
custom—for during those festivals the entire clan is obliged to commit all
the acts forbidden throughout the rest of the year.

The urge to duplicate the operation of the surrogate victim is even more
apparent in the case of totemic belief than in the “classic” sacrifice. Clearly
the truth we are seeking is close at hand, and although Freud failed to
grasp it, he was surely on the right track when he concentrated his atten-
tion on totemism. His intuition did not play him false in suggesting a
connection between the enigmas of religion and an actual act of murder.
But for want of a mechanism that would make this connection, Freud was
unable to translate his discovery into any kind of plausible formulation.
He never advanced beyond the idea of a single act of murder, in principle
at least, committed in prehistoric times—an idea that, if taken literally,
lends a note of fantasy to his theory.

Before we assert that Freud dreamed of murdering his own father or
wrote his book under dictation from his unconscious, it might be worth
while to review the arguments so forcefully advanced in Totem and Taboo.
Freud insists (as I have also done) on the need for unanimous participa-
tion in the rites. If these rites were not performed by the entire group
acting in unison they would be nothing more than criminal acts of
destructive intent. Freud fails to perceive the functional dimension of
unanimity, but he is nonetheless aware that the sanctity of the proceed-
ings depends on their indivisibility. In many cultures, moreover, the man/
animal or totemic monster assumes the guise of judge, mentor, and ances-
tor, without relinquishing his role as victim slaughtered by his fellows and
peers, the first being cut down by a community which, while mythic, is
nonetheless a double of real society.

We have here a series of clues well worth pursuing, and it is a sad
commentary on our present intellectual scene that we cannot draw the
logical conclusion from them—namely, a theory of collective murder —
without provoking an automatic rejection from critics who like to think of
themselves as the practitioners of impartial scientific inquiry!

A careful comparison of sacrificial rites and totemic beliefs will bring out
certain dominant strains that have a direct bearing on the subject of col-
lective murder. All the signs seem to suggest that the gods, along with the
community itself, owe their origin to internal and unanimous violence
and to a victim who is a member of the community:

“A life [Freud quotes Robertson Smith] which no single tribesman is allowed
to invade, and which can be sacrificed only by the consent and common action
of the kin, stands on the same footing with the life of the fellowtribesmen.” The
rule that every participant at the sacrificial meal must eat a share of the flesh of
the victim has the same meaning as the provision that the execution of a guilty
tribesman must be carried out by the tribe as a whole. In other words, the
sacrificial animal was treated as a member of the tribe; the sacrificing community,
the god and the sacrificial animal were of the same blood and members of the same clan.
(Freud’s italics)?

As we can see, the problematic aspects of the totemic theory do not
affect Freud’s basic conclusions. Indeed, totemism plays no part here. The
dynamism of Totem and Taboo is directed toward a general theory of sacri-
fice. Robertson Smith had already pointed the way, but Freud managed to
push the inquiry further—largely because he was indifferent to the theor-
etical debates then raging among anthropologists. The enormous mass of
collaborative information obviously demanded a single, all-embracing
explanation, a general theory that was first and foremost related to the
subject of sacrifice: “Robertson Smith explains that sacrifice at the altar
was the essential feature in the ritual of ancient religions. It plays the same
part in all religions, so that its origin must be traced back to very general
causes, operating everywhere in the same manner.”

Freud’s archetypal sacrificial rite was practiced by a tribe of the Sinai
desert. It is described by St. Nilus in the fourth century, and cited by
Robertson Smith, who himself found it highly significant:

The victim of the sacrifice, a camel, [Freud quoting Robertson Smith] “is bound
upon a rude altar of stones piled together, and when the leader of the band has
thrice led the worshippers round the altar in a solemn procession accompanied
with chants, he inflicts the first wound. .. and in all haste drinks the blood that
gushes forth. Forthwith the whole company fall on the victim with their
swords, hacking off pieces of the quivering flesh and devouring them raw with
such wild haste, that in the short interval between the rise of the day star [to
which the sacrifice was offered] ... and the disappearance of its rays before the
rising sun, the entire camel, body, bones, skin, blood and entrails, is wholly
devoured.”"!

In my opinion the so-called totemic survivals that Robertson Smith
thought he had detected in the sacrifice can be attributed, here as else-
where, to an incomplete grasp of the part played by the surrogate victim.
And Freud’s interest in these “totemic survivals” sprang from their rela-
tionship to his own concept of collective murder. Given the Sinai sacrifice
and the context in which it appears, we can hardly blame Freud from
drawing the conclusions that he did in favor of his murder theory. Indeed,
is it really so obvious that Freud has abandoned the principles of sound
scientific practice in this work and that his whole theory is based on a
personal illusion that is psychological in origin?

Faithful to his sources, Freud limits his discussion almost exclusively to
the camel sacrifice. One cannot help wondering what conclusions he
would have drawn had he taken into account similar practices over a
broad spectrum of independent cultures and submitted them to a
systematic comparison.

In the Sinai sacrifice the camel is bound like a criminal and the crowd is
armed; in the Dionysiac diasparagmos the victim is not bound and the
attackers have no weapons. But two constants remain: the crowd and the
mad rush at the victim. In some instances the victim is encouraged to flee;
in others, it is the participants who take flight. Im every instance a mob
murder is being reenacted, although the scenes will vary in details. These
divergences should not be attributed to any lapse of the ritual memory, for
the forms of collective murder differ somewhat from one religion to
another. These differences, though slight, are revealing, for they evoke
the realism of the model and therefore discourage any attempt at purely
formalist interpretation. These differences may have led to Freud’s intui-
tive grasp of the situation, even though they are only implicit in Totem and
Taboo. Indeed, it would have been impossible for Freud to consider them
explicitly, for his theory of a single, unique act of murder could neither
accommodate nor explain them.

An investigation into the nature of ritual resembles the sort of criminal
investigation—no less valid for figuring so frequently in detective fic-
tion—in which the solution of the mystery depends on a reenactment of
the crime. No matter how clever the criminal, no matter how careful he
may be to eliminate all traces of his presence, he is unable to extend his
activities or repeat his past successes without laying down a trail for his
pursuers. A seemingly insignificant detail, passed over in haste during the
investigation of the first crime, suddenly assumes importance when it
reappears in a slightly different guise. In the same way the successive
proofs of an engraving allow us to discern patterns or images that might
well pass unnoticed when looking at one print in isolation. These differ-
ences constitute the ethnological equivalent of Abschattungen, those
partial and always shifting perceptions that end by establishing, in terms
of Husserlian phenomenology, the stable and indubitable element of a
given object. Once the law of their variations has been apprehended, the
true object is correctly perceived. Doubt is then no longer possible; the
image remains indelible, and any additional information can only serve to
consolidate and reinforce the now correctly identified object.

Freud was not dreaming when he wrote Totem and Taboo, and he
assumed that the participants in sacrificial rites were not dreaming either.
He could well have turned the rites into a dream; this would have been a
possible line of defense for a formalist hard pressed by the massed body of
ethnological evidence. But Freud did not take that path. Efforts have been
made to prove him a formalist; but in this case, at least, he clearly per-
ceived that any attempt to structure the dream would be as futile as trying
to structure the wind. To declare sacrifice a psychoanalytical fantasy
would mean to lay aside an impressive body of rigorously determined
facts and observations that cry out for attention. To dissolve these
phenomena in dreams would be to deny the rites any status as a social
institution; it would be to deny, in effect, social unity itself.

The sacrificial act is too rich in concrete details to be only a simulation of
something that never actually occurred. This assertion can be made with-
out contradicting my previous statement that the act is a simulated
performance designed to offer a substitute satisfaction. Sacrifice takes the
place of an act that nobody under normal cultural conditions would dare
or even desire to commit; it is this aspect that Freud, wholly intent on the
origins of sacrifice, paradoxically failed to perceive. I qualify his failure as
paradoxical because Totem and Taboo lacks the one form of truth that
appears, though sometimes in distorted form, in the rest of his work.
Freud understands that sacrifice must be traced back to an event of a quite
different type from ritual itself; yet his intuition of origins, because he did
not follow it to the end, caused him to lose all sense of the function of the
rite. If sacrifice is accorded a particular role in the rite, this is because it
was at one time something else and because it retains that “something
else” as a model. In order to reconcile function with origin and illuminate
one by means of the other, Freud needed a tool that he failed to unearth:
the surrogate victim.

Nevertheless, Freud made an important discovery. He was the first
to maintain that all ritual practices, all mythical implications, have their
origins in an actual murder. Freud was unable to exploit the boundless
implications of this proposition; in fact, he seemed unaware of the truly
vertiginous scope of this idea. After his death, his discovery was summarily
dismissed. On the basis of secondary considerations Totem and Taboo was
written off as misleading or trivial. This attitude can be partially explained
by the primary concern of Freud’s followers to consolidate the terrain
conquered in the previous generation by Freud and others; they found
their efforts severely challenged by the implications of Totem and Taboo,
and so the work was thrust aside. Freud’s momentous discovery was
ignored as if it had never taken place.

Far from handling his ethnological material like a clumsy amateur,
Freud accomplished such a feat of systematization that he himself was
thrown off balance. He was unable to formulate the hypothesis that
would do justice to his discovery, and no one after him had the vision to
perceive that such a thing was even possible. As an advance scout Freud
was all too daring, and he found himself cut off from his own line. Freud
has been called a victim of natve historicism; the opposite is true. His
general orientation and his methods of research freed him from the
fragmentary theories of origin and the antistructural associations that his
contemporaries were prone to; at the same time he stayed clear of the
opposite excesses, which plague our own era. His mind was not closed to
questions of origin; nor did his failures awaken in him any formalistic or
antigenetic prejudices. Freud swiftly perceived that a firm grasp of
synchronic totalities should result in new concepts regarding the problem
of origins, concepts that had previously been wholly unimaginable.

One passage in Totem and Taboo is of particular relevance to our inquiry.
Freud is discussing tragedy, the tragic mode as it is practiced all over the
world:

A company of individuals, named and dressed alike, surrounded a single
figure, all hanging upon his words and deeds; they were the Chorus and the
impersonator of the Hero. He was originally the only actor. Later, a second and
third actor were added, to play as counterpart to the Hero and as characters
split off from him; but the character of the Hero himself and his relation to the
Chorus remained unaltered. The Hero of tragedy must suffer; to this day that
remains the essence of a tragedy. He has to bear the burden of what was
known as “tragic guilt”; the basis of that guilt is not always easy to find, for in
the light of our everyday life it is often no guilt at all. Asa rule it lay in rebellion
against some divine or human authority; and the Chorus accompanied the
Hero with feelings of sympathy, sought to hold him back, to warn him and to
sober him, and mourned over him when he had met with what was felt as the
merited punishment for his rash undertaking.

But why had the Hero of tragedy to suffer? And what was the meaning of
this “tragic guilt”? I will cut the discussion short and give a quick reply. He had
to suffer because he was the primal father, the Hero of the great primaeval
tragedy which was being re-enacted with a tendentious twist; and the tragic
guilt was the guilt which he had to take on himself in order to relieve the
Chorus from theirs. The scene upon the stage was derived from the historical
scene through a process of systematic distortion—one might even say, as the
product of a refined hypocrisy. In the remote reality it had actually been the
members of the Chorus who caused the Hero’s suffering; now, however, they
exhausted themselves with sympathy and regret and it was the Hero himself
who was responsible for his own sufferings. The crime which was thrown on to
his shoulders, presumptuousness and rebelliousness against a great authority,
was precisely the crime for which the members of the Chorus, the company of
brothers, were responsible. Thus the tragic Hero became, though it might be
against his will, the redeemer of the Chorus.'*

In many respects this passage brings us closer to the concept of the
surrogate victim and the mythical structuration effected through it than
anything we have yet encountered in Freud. Whole sentences address
themselves directly to our discussion. The hero represents the victim of a
momentous and unexpected tragedy. The tragic flaw attributed to him is
shared by the whole community, but he alone must bear its burden in
order for the city to be saved. The hero thus assumes the role of surrogate
victim; and in the very next paragraph Freud alludes to “the divine goat,
Dionysus.” Tragedy is thus defined as a tendentious reenactment, a
mythic inversion of an event that actually took place: “The scene upon the
stage was derived from the historical scene through a process of systematic
distortion—one might even say, as the product of a refined hypocrisy.”

Let me again call attention to what is undoubtedly an essential point:
the collective violence directed against the solitary hero takes place amidst
that dissolution of distinctions I discussed earlier on. The sons of the
primitive clan, henceforth deprived of fathers, have all become “enemy
brothers.” Their resemblance is such that they do not possess identities of
their own. We are left with a group of people ail bearing the same name,
identically dressed.

I must take care, however, not to exaggerate the similarities between
Freud’s theories and my own. The outlooks are ultimately different; and
the difference bears on the genesis of difference. According to Freud,
the crowd of doubles stands in opposition to the absolute specificity of the
hero. The hero monopolizes innocence; the mob monopolizes guilt. The
flaw attributed to the hero is not his, but belongs exclusively to the crowd.
The hero, then, is a victim pure and simple, charged with a crime he did
not commit. This concept of a simple oneway projection of guilt seems to
me inadequate. Sophocles is wiser; he makes it clear (and Dostoevsky was
to do the same in The Brothers Karamazov) that the surrogate victim, even
when falsely accused, may be as guilty as the others. For the traditional
concept of the “flaw” (perpetuated as “sin” by theologically minded
critics) should be substituted that of violence—violence in the past, the
future, and above all in the present, violence equally shared by all. After
all, Oedipus himself joined in the manhunt.

The Freudian interpretation is throughly modern in its inversion of the
mythical content. Thanks to the innocent victim, with whose fate one can
easily identify, it becomes possible to inculpate all the false innocents. This
is precisely what Voltaire did in his Oedipe, and what the contemporary
antitheater is striving to do in an atmosphere of ever-increasing confusion
and hysteria. Our neighbor’s “values” are forever being inverted, to be
used as a weapon against him. In the final analysis, however, each and
every one of us is implicated in the effort to perpetuate the structures of
the myth whose very imbalance is designed to stimulate our own
aggression.

Differences seem to have vanished, only to reappear in inverted form,
thereby perpetuating themselves. It is these differences that Heidegger
refers to in relation to all of philosophy from Plato to Nietzsche; there the
identical inversion occurs. Philosophical concepts serve to shield from
sight the tragic conflict of human antagonisms. What Freud fails to per-
ceive is that his own thought is influenced by these same patterns and that
even his interpretation of tragedy forms part of the conflict and never
succeeds in rising above it. Moreover, the fixed nature of his reading
corresponds precisely to the concept of the single murder, the murder of a
true father, a true hero, which took place at a single moment in time.

The father figure is viewed as an oppressive monster during his life but
is transformed at death into a persecuted hero. This operation is effected
by the mechanism of the sacred—a mechanism Freud does not uncover,
since he remains its victim. In order to escape once and for all from the
domination of a certain kind of morality (even metamorphosed into
antimorality) and a certain kind of metaphysic (even disguised as
antimetaphysics), we must renounce the gambit of “good” and “bad’—
even in its inverted form. We must acknowledge that misapprehensions
abound, that violence is to be found everywhere, and that our partial
understanding of violence by no means assures us victory over it. The first
step must be the hero’s reintegration into the chorus, his assumption of
the chorus’ characteristic lack of characteristics.

It might be argued that Freud adheres more closely to the structure of
tragedy in his interpretation than I do, and in one sense this is correct. In
the tragic form inherited from myth and ritual the solitary figure of the
hero does indeed occupy the dominant central position assigned him by
Freud. But that is only the beginning of the analysis; the matter must be
pressed to its conclusion, and the tragic form itself, along with the myth,
must be scrupulously dismantled. Thus we will learn that Sophocles, while
not following through to the end, succeeded nonetheless in advancing
farther than Freud along the path of demystification. Sophocles treats the
essential elusiveness of the heroic difference with relentless irony, making
it plain that the most conspicuous examples of “individuality” are put in
doubt at the very moment when they seem strongest and most valid—
when, in short, they are brought into violent opposition with another
individual who turns out to be almost identical.

My approach incorporates all Freud’s observations; it also takes into
account those elements that escaped his, but not Sophocles’, attention.
Finally, it deals with those elements that escaped even Sophocles’
notice—with the configurations that give rise to myth and the different
perspectives (including the psychoanalytic and the tragic) from which the
subject can be viewed. In short, my innovation is to introduce the
mechanism of the surrogate victim.

Freud’s comments on Greek tragedy are undoubtedly the most
profound of all modern pronouncements on the subject. And yet they
remain inconclusive.

Strictly speaking, it is not incorrect to qualify tragedy as tendentious, for
the tragic element always springs up amidst the ruins of a mythic frame-
work. However, tragedy is the least tendentious of all mythic forms. As we
have seen, the aim of tragic inspiration is to reestablish the reciprocity of
reprisals, to restore the symmetry of violence; in short, to correct the
tendentious aspect. And Freud’s approach takes the same line. It reestab-
lishes certain elements of reciprocity, but it does not go so far as tragedy
itself goes. The Freudian approach is even more tendentious than tragedy
is, because Freud shares the modern inclination to shift all blame for
violence onto others. Thus Freud finds himself caught up in the give-and-
take of reprisals, in the dual role of model and obstacle, and in the vicious
cycle of mimetic desire. That is the fallacy of the modern mind—which,
even when it is either too evolved or too knowledgeable to claim immunity
from all violent impulses, invariably resorts to an ideal of nonviolence,
completely foreign to the Greek mind, as a covertly violent criterion for all
judgments and critical evaluations.

Like all biased pronouncements, Freud's strictures on Greek tragedy
ultimately turn against their author. Ultimately it is Freud himself
who appears guilty of “refined hypocrisy.” And the modern critic in his
concerted effort to undermine the structure of all religious, moral, and
cultural distinctions ultimately brings these distinctions crashing down on
his own head. He sets himself up as the prophet of new insights and new
ideas, as the sole possessor of an infallible system of analysis—and
finds himself condemned to recapitulate all the age-old distinctions of
difference: Tiresias redivivus!

The quality of tendentiousness is representative of the sacred difference
that each faction strives to wrest from the other and that shifts from one
side to the other with ever-increasing speed as the rival insights come
into contact. It is a quality that perhaps applies to interpretation itself,
whether it is an analysis of Oedipus the King or a quarrel over psycho-
analysis and other modern methodologies. Ostensibly the sole object in
dispute is the culture-in-crisis, of which each antagonist flatters himself
he is the true champion. Everybody is intent on diagnosing the illness in
order to find a cure. But in fact the illness is the other, the other with his
false diagnoses and poisonous prescriptions. When real responsibilities
vanish, the game remains unchanged; in fact it is all the better for being
played without stakes, with each contestant striving to outshine his
neighbor rather than trying to shed real light on the supposed object of
their concern.

All in all the modern crisis, like all sacrificial crises, can be defined as the
elimination of differences. The interplay of antagonisms actually does the
eliminating, without ever being recognized for what it truly is: the increas-
ingly feeble, increasingly tragic intervention of an enfeebled difference.
This difference appears to be always growing, but it fades away whenever
someone tries to appropriate it. Each faction is mystified by the isolated
restructurings, increasingly fragile and transitory, which lend their sup-
port to each of the antagonists in turn. The final degradation of the mythic
element takes the form of a proliferation of rival and mutually destructive
forms whose relationship to the myth itself is highly ambiguous. These
forms are demystifying as well as mythic; that is, they are mythic in the
very nature of their demystification, which is never illusory, to be sure,
but is always restricted to the other myth. The myths of demystification
cling to the great collective myth and draw nourishment from it, rather
like worms feeding on a corpse.

Greek tragedy, which acknowledges the influence of this process,
clearly has more to say about it than does psychoanalysis, which claims
immunity from it. Only by studiously ignoring those texts that threaten to
undermine their system do psychoanalysts maintain their complacency.
Although they concede that artistic beauty is worthy of reverence and
awe, they scornfully dismiss the actual work as fanciful, effete, narcotic—
the antithesis of hard scientific truth. Critics consider the work of art a
passive object that will yield its secrets on command to all adherents of the
latest form of absolute knowledge, whatever that form may be.

As far as I can see, this process of mystifying demystification has been
fully comprehended by artists, but never by psychoanalysts or sociologists.
What is most remarkable is the role played by literary critics. Not
infrequently they inveigh against the scientists for whatever hard-headed
insights they may actually have contributed to an understanding of the
creative process. Yet at the same time they echo the scientists’ belief that
“literature” is basically innocuous and ultimately meaningless and seem
to share their a priori conviction that no work of literature has any direct
relation to reality.

We have on occasion observed Sophocles demystifying psychoanalysis,
but we shall never see psychoanalysis demystifying Sophocles. In fact,
psychoanalytic thought has never really come to grips with Sophocles.
Only at his best, as in the case discussed above, does Freud manage to
move even parallel to him.

To examine a work of art from the perspective of the surrogate victim
and its attendant mechanism is to consider it in terms of collective vio-
lence and to attempt to discover what the work omits as much—if not
more—as what it includes. That is surely an essential first step in any
critical venture. Yet at first glance the task may seem futile; any practical
application to literature seems destined to end in broad generalities and
esoteric abstractions.

Returning to the text of Freud, however, we find that such is not
the case. Here we encounter an omission that is conspicuous, not to say
astonishing, if we take the context into account.

In any general discussion of Greek tragedy there is a tendency to refer
either implicitly or explicitly to one particular work that exemplifies the
genre. This practice was initiated by Aristotle and is still in force today.
And when one’s name is Sigmund Freud, one has every reason to adhere
to the convention.

And yet Freud did not do so. It is, of course, Oedipus the King that springs
to mind in connection with Freud, and we have ourselves already had
recourse to the play; but Freud does not make the slightest allusion to it—
neither in the passage I have cited nor in the pages preceding and follow-
ing it. There are references to Artis, Adonis, Tammuz, Mithra, the Titans,
Dionysus, Christianity—in the name of demystification, of course!—but
there is no mention of Oedipus as a tragic hero nor any reference to the
play about him.

It can be objected that Oedipus the King is, after all, only one tragedy
among many; nothing obliges Freud to make any specific reference to it.
The fact that it is not specifically referred to does not mean that Freud has
specifically excluded it. One can just as well conclude that he has simply
incorporated this particular tragedy into his total picture of tragedy and
thus taken it into consideration.

However, this line of argument is not valid. Once our attention has been
drawn to the absence of the archetypal tragedy, details come to mind that
suggest that its absence is due neither to chance nor to accident.

On rereading Freud’s definition of tragic guilt, we realize that it cannot
be made applicable to Oedipus the King. The hero “has to bear the burden of
what was known as ‘tragic guilt’; the basis of that guilt is not always easy
to find, for in the light of our everyday life it is often no guilt at all.” This
definition applies to some tragedies—but not to Oedipus the King. There is
nothing vague or indefinite about the source of Oedipus’ guilt, at least not
in the eyes of Freud and his followers.

Can it be that Freud did not think of Oedipus at this juncture, that he
simply forgot about him—that Oedipus slipped his mind? It is easy to
imagine what that voracious pack of neopsychoanalytic blood-hounds,
hot on the trail of Totem and Taboo, will deduce from such a lapse or “slip.”
Far from seeing in Totem and Taboo a classic example, in conformity with
the usual diagnostic pattern, of the return of a repressed subject, they will
undoubtedly recognize here the ultimate example of extreme repres-
sion—Oedipus’s surprising and momentous journey to the innermost
recesses of the Freudian unconscious.

The Freud of Totem and Taboo, then, is in such a state that he
has repressed all references to Oedipus. Such a proposition is truly
mindboggling!

Fortunately, another possibility presents itself. In the passage just
quoted there occurs a modest qualifier that may be of importance. “In the
light of our everyday life,” Freud cautions us, tragic guilt “is often no guilt
at all.” The word “often” serves to warn us that the assertion is not invari-
ably valid; it admits the possibility of exceptional tragedies, or at the very
least of one exceptional tragedy. That admission seems relevant here. In at
least one tragedy, Freud is saying, there is a case of tragic guilt that would
be readily accepted as such in everyday existence: it involves patricide
and incest. This modifying “often” is explicit; it cannot be interpreted as
ignoring Oedipus. In fact, there is reason to believe that it was inserted
specifically with Oedipus in mind.

Throughout Totem and Taboo Oedipus is conspicuous by his absence. The
omission is not a natural or an unconscious one; it is wholly conscious and
deliberate. We do not have to do with Freud’s complexes here, but with
his conscious motives—which, it should be said, are a good deal more
varied and interesting than his complexes. We must ask ourselves why
Freud has suddenly made Oedipus the object of a systematic act of
exclusion.

If we examine this exclusion not only in its immediate context but in
that of the work itself, it seems even more troubling. For what after all is
the subject of Totem and Taboo? Is Freud not dealing with the father, the
father of the primitive tribe who was destined to be murdered? Freud’s
subject is patricide—the very crime Freud believed he had discovered at
the heart of Greek tragedy, a crime projected by the criminals onto their
victims. Certainly, it is the very crime that first Tiresias and then all of
Thebes attributed to the unfortunate Oedipus. It would be hard to
imagine a more economical and more telling argument in favor of the
theory of tragedy advanced in Totem and Taboo than a simple comparison
of this theory with the content of Oedipus the King. And yet Freud says not
a word about the play. It is all we can do to keep from tugging at the sleeve
of the celebrated inventor of the Oedipuskomplex, to remind him that there
exists a tragedy that deals precisely with the subject of patricide.

Why did Freud choose to dispense with this striking example? There is
only one answer: he could not use Oedipus the King in an interpretation
that linked tragedy to an actual case of patricide without undermining his
other, standard interpretation, the official psychoanalytic interpretation,
which presents Oedipus the King as a simple reflection of unconscious
desires that formally excludes any execution of these desires. Oedipus
here appears in a strange relationship to his own complex. As a primordial
father-figure, he has no father of his own and thus can scarcely be said to
have any complexes regarding his paternity.

On a broader and more general plane, we cannot view Oedipus’s crimes
in their true light, observe patricide and incest in a context that includes
phenomena of the “scapegoat” variety, no matter how dimly they may
appear, without giving rise to questions that challenge the very basis of
psychoanalytic thought.

A question mark cropped up in Freud’s work, and because he had no
answer at hand he chose to ignore it. A more prudent author would have
simply suppressed all the passages in Totem and Taboo relating to tragedy.
Fortunately, prudence was not one of Freud’s characteristics. It is the
richness of his ideas, their intuitive interest that Freud savored; he
therefore decided to preserve them all, while carefully sidestepping any
embarrassing allusions to Oedipus the King.

Freud’s censorship of the Oedipus references was not exercised in any
psychoanalytic sense, but as an act of censorship pure and simple. That is
not to say, however, that his intention was to deceive. Freud was fully
confident that given time he would be able to answer all questions with-
out violating the basic premises of psychoanalysis; but, as always, he was
in a hurry. He therefore put the question aside for future consideration,
without realizing that the answer would never be forthcoming.

If Freud had attempted to resolve the contradiction he would probably
have realized that neither his first nor his second reading of Oedipus the
King had succeeded in coming to grips either with the Oedipus myth or
with tragedy as a whole. Neither repressed desire nor an actual act of
patricide are really satisfactory answers, and the obstinate duality of
Freud’s theories, both here and throughout his work, suggests that a cer-
tain distortion has taken place. In avoiding the true problem Freud turned
away from what was potentially the most profitable line of inquiry, one
that might finally have led him to the surrogate victim. Behind Freud’s
exclusion of Oedipus from Totem and Taboo, an initial act that constitutes a
deliberate tactical maneuver, it is possible to perceive a second, inadvert-
ent and unconscious act of exclusion that in fact determines the structure
of the whole work. Here again psychoanalysis offers no explanation. And
there is no point in asking psychoanalysis to explain an exclusion which,
among other things, lays the groundwork for psychoanalysis itself.

The parentheses around Oedipus the King constitute a sort of critical
hiatus, a protective barrier surrounding the theory of psychoanalysis.
Earlier we had a glimpse of the same process operating in connection with
mimetic desire; there too it was a question of defending the Oedipus com-
plex from possible attack. In the hierarchy of Freudian themes this complex
maintains a priveleged position that defines Freud’s historical limitations
as a thinker. It represents the point beyond which deconstruction of the
myth cannot go.

We find, too, the same contrast between Freud and his successors as we
did in the case of mimetic desire. Freud attempted to isolate and neutralize
the insights that threatened to contaminate the purity of his doctrine, but
he was too gifted and too vital to reject them entirely, and he had too great
a love for intellectual exploration to suppress his most adventurous obser-
vations. His followers, however, did not share this boldness. They set out
to eliminate all incongruities from his work, and their censorship
extended to the vital issue of mimetic desire on the one hand, and on the
other, to all of Totem and Taboo. The passages on tragedy seem never to
have exerted any influence; even the most devoutly Freudian of literary
critics has failed to make use of them. And yet it is these passages alone
that contain Freud’s most striking literary insight.

If the great advance of Totem and Taboo is also a kind of detour and the
work seems to end in an impasse, this is due to the heavy burden of
psychoanalytic dogma with which the author approaches his text. Natur-
ally he is unwilling to relinquish this burden, which he has come to regard
as his most precious possession. The major obstacle is the theme of the
father. By transforming the crucial revelation of collective murder into an
act of patricide, the paternal theme provides Freud’s psychoanalytic
adversaries, and others, with the very arguments they need to discredit
his theory. It is the paternal theme that skews Freud’s interpretation of
tragedy, preventing him from settling the problem of incest interdiction in
a wholly satisfactory manner.

As we have seen, the intrusion of the collective murder into Totem
and Taboo fails to answer the problems raised by the incest interdictions
and can even be said to stand in the way of their solution. It breaks the
continuity between the sexual monopoly of the awesome father figure
and the historical strength of the interdictions. In an initial effort to
restore this continuity Freud resorts to a piece of juggling which, however,
fails of its effect:

What up to then had been prevented by his [the father’s] actual existence
was thenceforward prohibited by the sons themselves, in accordance with the
psychological procedure so familiar to us in psycho-analysis under the name of
“deferred obedience.” They revoked their deed by forbidding the killing of the
totem, the substitute for their father; and they renounced its fruits by resigning
their claim to the women who had now been set free. They thus created out of
their filial sense of guilt the two fundamental taboos of totemism, which for
that very reason inevitably corresponded to the two repressed wishes of the
Oedipus complex."*

Freud shows that he recognizes the fragility of this argument by
immediately introducing a supplementary proof. As is so often the case
with this ingenious but hasty thinker, these new arguments are not only
additional supports for the old ones, but they constitute a wholly fresh
theory that surreptitiously challenges certain fundamental assumptions of
psychoanalysis:

The prohibition of incest ... has a powerful practical basis as well. Sexual
desires do not unite men but divide them. Though the brothers had banded
together in order to overcome their father, they were all one another’s rivals in
regard to the women. Each of them would have wished, like his father, to have
all the women to himself. The new organization would have collapsed in a
struggle of all against all, for none of them was of such overmastering strength
as to be able to take on his father’s part with success. Thus the brothers had no
alternative, if they were to live together, but—not, perhaps, until they had
passed through many dangerous crises—to institute the law against incest, by
which they all alike renounced the women whom they desired and who had
been their chief motive for dispatching their father."

In the first quotation the father has been dead only a short time and his
memory pervades everything. In the second his death has receded in time;
we might almost say that it is repeated afresh, this time in Freud’s imagination.
Freud sees himself following the avatars of the clan, after the act of
collective murder, proceeding through time step by step. In fact he is
gradually disengaging himself from the confines of modern family life that
have held him prisoner. All family relationships blur and fade away. For
instance, it is no longer possible to determine the degree of concupiscence
by the closeness of the blood tie. All the women are now on the same
level: “Each of them would have wished, like his father, to have all the
women to himself.” “Mothers” and “sisters” become a cause of rivalry not
because they are intrinsically more desirable but simply because they
happen to be at hand. Desire no longer seeks out a privileged object.

Although this rivalry is initially sexual, it eventually attains a scope and
intensity that is hardly justified by sexual appetite alone. Freud himself
makes that clear. No one can hope to emulate the great feats of the father,
“for none of them was of such overmastering strength as to be able to take
on his father’s part with success.” There are a thousand pretexts for such a
rivalry, because in the last analysis its sole object is the attainment of
sovereign violence. On one side there are only the women, and on the
other the men, who are unable to divide the women among themselves.
The situation described by Freud has supposedly arisen because of the
death of the dominant father, but now everything takes place as if the
father had never existed. The emphasis has shifted to the enemy brothers, who
are virtually indistinguishable from one another; and we now find
ourselves caught up in the familiar process of reciprocal violence,
confronting the symmetrical patterns of the sacrificial crisis.

Freud here approaches the ultimate cause of the incest taboo, as he
moves away from his habitual psychoanalytical themes. That is the way of
tragedy itself, the way of indifferentiation that Freud, as we have seen,
brings into Totem and Taboo with his description of the chorus of enemy
brothers: “A crowd of people all with the same name and similarly
attired.”

The interdiction is no longer presented as a consequence of a “psycho-
logical procedure so familiar to us in psychoanalysis,” but of the urgent
necessity of preventing a “struggle of all against all” that would bring
about the collapse of the society. We are now dealing with a concrete fact:
“Sexual desires do not unite men, but divide them.”

Freud does not make the slightest allusion to his initial theory. Without
seeming even to realize it, he is clearing the scene of complexes and
fantasies to make way for real functions, which will now provide the basis
for the interdictions. Freud, who contributed to so much of the confusion
and misunderstanding concerning the nature of religion, became in
Totem and Taboo the first to proclaim the true function of incest interdic-
tions. And he was also the first to turn his back on his own revelations.

The second theory is superior to the first in its explanation of the
function of the prohibitions. In discussing the origin of these prohibitions,
it asserts that the brothers eventually come to an amicable agreement
concerning their mutual renunciation of the women.

However, the absolute character of the prohibition excludes the
possibility that it might originate in a negotiated peace. If the men were
indeed capable of arriving at some sort of mutual agreement, it is certain
that all the women would not have fallen under the same irrevocable
taboo. Some sort of division of the goods would surely have been arranged.

Freud suspected that in such circumstances violence was bound to
triumph. That was why he referred to the “serious dissensions” that
would inevitably precede the final agreement and the forceful arguments
that were meant to bring home to the warring brothers the gravity of their
situation. If violence is unleashed, prohibitions become indispensable, for
without them human society would vanish. Yet is there any reason why
human society should not vanish? Freud says nothing that makes a
reconciliation necessary, or even possible—a reconciliation that must
be brought about by means of a prohibition as “irrational” and “affective”
(to use Freud’s terms) as the prohibition concerning incest. An antiinces-
tuous social contract is hardly a convincing proposition, and the theory
that had such a promising beginning falters at its conclusion.

Although Freud’s second theory marks an advance on the first in its
explanation of the function of prohibitions, it is less satisfactory than the
first in regard to origins. The true outcome was to have eluded the
brothers; it eluded Freud instead.

I have attempted to follow step by step the path that led from the first
theory to the second. In so doing I have focused on the dynamics of a line
of thought that is ridding itself, little by little, of all cultural and family ties.
It is now clear that this line of thought never achieves its goal. The second
incest theory follows the same pattern as the passages on tragedy. Both
brothers and women are reduced to the anonymity of complete equality,
but the father retains his separateness. Because he is dead, he is immune
from the operation of indifferentiation. He is the only one who does not
relinquish his family role in the course of the proceedings; and
unfortunately his is the crucial role. Freud manages to “defilialize” the
sons, but he goes no further. The line of thought that breaks off here needs
to be drawn out to its conclusion: the father has to be “depaternalized.”

To pursue Freud’s train of thought to a conclusion does not involve
rejecting the role of the murder, whose importance is confirmed by ample
ethnological evidence. Rather, it involves rejecting the role of the father,
transcending the family framework and the dogma of psychoanalysis.

The overbearing presence of the father figure intervenes constantly,
concealing the mechanism of religion and preventing Freud from articu-
lating the true character of the sacrificial rites, festivals, and all the other
evidence. Every sentence that begins, “Psychoanalysis demonstrates .. .”
or “Psychoanalysis has revealed ...” invariably evades the true explan-
ation. “Psychoanalysis has revealed that the totem animal is in reality a
substitute for the father; and this tallies with the contradictory fact that,
though the killing of the animal is as a rule forbidden, yet its killing is a
festive occasion—with the fact that it is killed and not mourned.””

In fact the father explains nothing. If we hope to get to the root of the
matter we must put the father out of our minds and concentrate on the
fact that the enormous impression made on the community by the collect-
ive murder is not due to the victim’s identity per se, but to his role as
unifying agent. In other words, this impression derives from the wave of
unanimity reestablished by the victim’s presence and directed against
the victim. It is this conjunction of “by” and “against” that explains the
apparent contradictions of the religious practices, the constant need to
repeat the killing even though the victim is divine—indeed, because it is
divine.

It is not the theme of collective murder that constitutes the weakness of
Totem and Taboo, but the mass of psychoanalytical material that obscures
that theme. If only Freud had shifted his attention away from the
arguments that precede the murder and that he hoped would provide a
motivation for it; if only he had been willing to jettison his psychoanalytic
explanations, then he would have seen that the violence occurs without
reason, that the murder has no meaning outside itself.

Once the murder has been stripped of its associations with the father
figure the reason for its tremendous impact on the community becomes
plain, as does the secret of its success, of its ritual repetitions and the
double judgment that invariably accompanies it. To understand all this is
to realize that the conclusion to the second theory, which the enemy
brothers are vainly trying to reach, has already been found by Freud, and
indeed constitutes his main theme: anything that prevents the act of
murder from becoming merely an unalloyed operation of the surrogate
victim also prevents it from taking place at its truly appropriate time, at
the end—not the beginning—of the sacrificial crisis.

Only the surrogate victim is capable of bringing the inconclusive second
theory to a conclusion; only its intervention can put an end to the
violence and effect a union of the two incest theories. Instead of serving as
a futile and even obstructive prologue to the crisis of the brothers, the
murder can play a crucial role at the end, providing the resolution to the
crisis outlined by Freud himself and a point of departure for the cultural
order. Indeed, that murder must be the ultimate source of all incest
prohibitions.

Up to this point I have limited my examination of incest prohibitions to
the context of Totem and Taboo. My reading of the work has led me to
suppose that the roots of these prohibitions, as of many other facets of the
cultural order, are embedded in generative violence. Freud was the first to
link the problem of prohibitions to that of sacrifice and the first who
sought to resolve the two problems by means of the collective murder. If
Freud’s explanation of sacrifice must be adjusted in favor of the surrogate
victim, then we must assume that the same will apply to his account of
incest prohibitions. But before I embark on this question I would like to
make it clear that even though this adjustment may favor my own line of
enquiry, it does no violence to the basic premises of Freud’s study.
It introduces no elements not already contained therein and, in fact,
owes its origins to the inherent dynamism and suggestiveness of Freud’s
work.

Let us briefly recall the role played by the primitive horde in Totem and
Taboo. Darwin's hypothesis offers a clear-cut explanation of the incest
prohibitions, and it is obvious that Freud’s initial attraction to the hypothe-
sis stems from this fact. The hypothesis appears in the course of an initial
discussion of exogamy. The second important hypothesis of Totem and
Taboo—this one wholly Freud’s—concerns collective murder and must
have been formulated somewhat later as a result of Freud’s readings in
ethnology. Initially, then, the two hypotheses are independent of one
another. Darwin makes no mention of the collective murder; on the other
hand, there is nothing relating to Darwin’s theory of the primitive horde
in the ethnological material that suggested the theme of the collective
murder.

Freud attempted to wed the two theories, and the result was a mixture
of history and prehistory whose arbitrary quality has frequently been
noted. Equally dubious is Freud’s claim to have extracted from cultural
documents of relatively recent date material pertaining to an event
supposedly unique and situated in a fabulous and distant past.

Freud’s argument not only fails to carry conviction but also contributes
nothing to the insights that form the true substance of the work. If Freud
took up the primitive horde theory because of the possibilities it offered
for dealing with the problem of prohibitions, it is hard to see why he did
not renounce it once the murder concept, by breaking the link between
the sexual privilege of the primordial father and the prohibitions, had for
all practical purposes eliminated these possibilities.

Again, if Freud meant to develop his murder theory he had no reason to
cling to the horde, which is hindered rather than helped by the concept of
the murder. Ultimately the two theories are incompatible, and one must
choose between them. Because the best part of Totem and Taboo is devoted
to a presentation of the murder theory and a demonstration that the
murder is the consequence ofall the religious and ethnological data at our
disposal, it is natural to assume that ultimately Freud would have opted
for the murder theory. Moreover, the horde is irrelevant here; its initial
usefulness seems to have been dissipated.

However, Freud made no such choice. He kept the murder and declined
to renounce the horde, never realizing that the horde had now lost its
raison d’étre. The reason for this lapsus is clear: the horde theory refers
the collective murder to the sphere of the father figure. Consequently, the
precious axioms of psychoanalysis are preserved. The primitive horde is a
perfect materialization of the psychoanalystic myth. Once again we brush
against invisible barriers beyond which Freud’s logic never ventures.

Here again Freud’s successors seem to emphasize the regressive aspect
of his thought. The “murdered father” theory of Totem and Taboo is clearly
indefensible, but the vulnerable element is not the “murder” but the
“father.” And although the arguments of Freud’s successors have some
merit if taken literally, we cannot respect their rejection of the work as a
whole. While purporting to attack the weaknesses of Freud’s concept they
are in fact seeking to suppress its strengths. It is at once paradoxical and
highly significant that Freud’s heirs—his sons, so to speak—should draw
on one of their “father’s” principal weaknesses, that timidity that they
themselves share, in order to purge his doctrine of all elements that are
foreign to their own way of thinking. Yet it is precisely those elements that
constitute the truly important and innovative aspect of Totem and Taboo.
When the effort is made to separate true from false, the false is invariably
paraded as the true. The error lies in the concept of the father and the
application of psychoanalysis; the truth lies in the concept of the collective
murder and, strange as it may seem, in Freud’s ethnology. A fresh and
constructive reading of the work should lead us to reject almost all the
elements that psychoanalysts recognize as valid and to acknowledge the
validity of those very elements that psychoanalysts reject.

In the course of this investigation it has become clear that Totem and
Taboo is more compatible with the theory of the surrogate victim as the
foundation of culture than is any other modern work. Thus, in spite of
the manifold difficulties created by the impossibilites in the Freudian
theory—impossibilities that had hitherto discredited it—we were able to
acknowledge a great insight in Totem and Taboo.

The overlapping of theories in Freud’s work, their profusion and
multiplicity, can only be interpreted as a sign of failure. As soon as the
surrogate victim is introduced into the picture, the scattered fragments of
Freud’s speculations come together like pieces in a puzzle. In their frag-
mentary state the Freudian analyses have little to tell us, but when once
they have been drawn together by means of the surrogate victim their
impact appears momentous, and it can hardly be claimed that this new
unity was imposed from the outside. We have only to cease regarding
Freud’s thought in terms of infallible dogma to see that he was always
fundamentally concerned with the operation of the surrogate victim, and
was constantly, though hesitatingly, attempting to come to terms with
that question.

I could easily extend my demonstration to other works of Freud. These
works should be analyzed in the same manner as we analyze rites. For any
cultural interpretation is ultimately only another form of rite; as such,
it stems from the operation of the surrogate victim and can be fully
systematized and analyzed only in its light.

The comparative approach should yield the common denominator of
those works of Freud that complement without ever quite repeating or
duplicating each other. The many different elements that make up these
related texts obscure their fundamental unity; yet that unity lies near
at hand.

Freud’s Moses and Monotheism seems to complement Totem and Taboo
in many respects. Just as in Totem and Taboo we encounter, prior to the
murder, a father and son—that is, a family—so in Moses and Monotheism we
encounter, prior to the murder, the story of Moses and the Mosaic
religion—that is, society. Moses plays a role similar to that of the
primordial father. And the Hebrew people, deprived of their prophet by
Moses’ death, resemble the group of brothers deprived of their father after
the murder described in Totem and Taboo.

Once again, all the possible implications of the act of collective violence
can be set forth in advance. If we deduct all those that pertain exclusively
to Totem and Taboo on the one hand, and on the other, all those with
relevance only to Moses and Monotheism (that is, the implications for the
family in the former work, and for the people, the nation and the Jewish
religion in the latter work), we find that we are left with a single common
denominator: the metamorphosis of reciprocal violence into generative
violence by means of the murder of somebody, no matter whom—a figure
chosen, as it were, at random.

Similarly, in order to bring about a synthesis of the two Freudian
theories on the origin of incest prohibitions, the collective murder must be
taken out of the familial framework of the first theory and incorporated
into the societal framework of the second theory.

My own theories are based upon this operation of double synthesis. In
fact, their primary concern is that point where all the Freudian interpret-
ations examined here begin to converge. No sooner does the generative
violence make its appearance, caught up in the Freudian dynamics, than
we begin to anticipate the slight modifications that permit it to assume its
function as a universal bond—a function that in turn derives from its role
as a universal structural support.

We are not indulging in impressionistic literary criticism, but in objective
research. The fact that we can proceed further than Freud down a path of
his own choosing offers us valuable insight into his work. It becomes
possible to finish phrases left dangling by the author, to determine why
and when his thought went astray; in short, to place him precisely. In his
Essay on Psychoanalysis Freud comes as close to the concept of mimetic
desire as he does to that of generative violence in Totem and Taboo and
Moses and Monotheism. In each instance the distance from the objective is
the same, as is the margin of error; the basic standpoint remains
unchanged.

Desire, for most modern thinkers, is anchored in an object. In order to
perceive the implications of an infinitely mobile mimesis we must realize
that the boundless potentiality of violence can only be contained by the
operation of the surrogate victim. After all, we cannot postulate the exist-
ence in man of a desire radically disruptive of human relations without
simultaneously postulating the means of keeping this desire in check. To
free ourselves forever from the illusions of humanism there is only one
requirement, which happens to be the very one that modern men refuse
to meet: we must acknowledge mankind’s thorough dependence on
religion. This, it is plain, Freud was not inclined to do. He was not alone in
his subservience to an increasingly enfeebled humanist ideal; he had no
notion of the intellectual revolution for which he was paving the way.

How are we to imagine the birth of cultural prohibitions? It must
be thought of concurrently with all other cultural births. The divine
epiphany, the universal upsurge of the monstrous double engulfs the
community and simultaneously makes its presence felt at all points of
conflict. It passes between the “enemy brothers,” who fall back thunder-
struck. Whatever the pretext for the conflict may have been—food,
weapons, land, women—the antagonists suspend their struggle, now and
forever. Henceforth everything touched by the sacred violence belongs to
the gods; as such, it becomes the object of a most solemn prohibition.

The antagonists have been sobered and thoroughly frightened. From
now on they will do everything possible to keep from relapsing into
reciprocal violence. Moreover, divine anger has taught them that preventive
measures are necessary. Wherever violence occurs, a prohibition is proclaimed.

The sentence weighs on all the women who figured as prizes in the
rivalry; that is, on all women who live within a group—not because they
are intrinsically more desirable, but because they are near at hand
and therefore likely objects of rivalry. The prohibition always covers the
closest instances of consanguinity, but its outer limits are not necessarily
confined to blood relations.

Both the principle of prohibition and the forms it takes are not without
their practical uses. It would be untrue to say that they were designed to
deal with an imaginary situation; on the contrary, they serve to prevent
people from being caught up in violent mimesis. As we saw in the previ-
ous chapter, the prohibitions of primitive peoples display a knowledge of
violence and its ways that surpasses our modern comprehension. The
reason is clear: the prohibitions were dictated by violence itself, by the
violent manifestations of a previous crisis, and they are fixed in place as a
bulwark against similar outbursts. If the prohibitions seem evenly
matched with the violence they are directed against, that is because in the
final analysis the two are one and the same. That explains why in times of
crisis the prohibitions ultimately contribute to the very violence they
are designed to suppress. Like any other form of sacrificial prophylaxis,
prohibitions can on occasion turn against their users.

All the evidence seems to confirm the proposal, set forth at the outset of
this work, that sexuality is part of the larger problem of violence and the
sacred. Sexual prohibitions, like all other prohibitions, are sacrificial in
nature; and all legitimate sexuality is sacrificial. Strictly speaking, between
members of the same community, legitimate sexuality exists no more
than legitimate violence in the community. The prohibitions involving
incest and those directed against murder or ritual killing among members
of the same community have a common origin and function. That is why
they resemble one another and why in many cases, as Robertson Smith
has pointed out, they cover exactly the same ground.

Like blood sacrifice, legitimate sexuality (that of matrimonial unions)
never chooses its “victims” among those who live together. The regula-
tions governing marriage resemble the regulations governing the choice
of sacrificial victims. All these regulations serve to endow both sexuality
and violence with the same centrifugal force. In many instances the
sacrifical deviations of sexuality and violence are virtually indistinguish-
able. Marriage vows can be duly attended by ritualized violence, analo-
gous to other forms of ritual warfare. This systematized violence resembles
the endless cycle of revenge that might well rage inside if there were no
substitute for it outside the community, and the reciprocal exchange of
violence with outsiders is one with the exchange of women that provides
men with sexual objects from outside the community. The problem is
always the same: violence is both the disease (inside) and the cure
(outside). Violence, like sexual desire, must be forbidden wherever its
presence is incompatible with communal existence.

Even today, legitimized sexuality in the West reveals traces of its
sacrificial character. The sexual relation of husband and wife is the central
and fundamental issue of family life. After all, it is the origin of family
life—and yet it is kept out of sight and plays no part, strictly speaking, in
family life. As far as the closest relatives, particularly the children, are
concerned, the sexual relation of husband and wife does not exist. It
is sometimes as thoroughly hidden as that most secret sort of violence,
generative violence itself. Psychoanalysis is wrong I believe to attribute to
young children a knowledge of parental sexuality.

Surrounding this legitimized sexuality is a vast expanse of forbidden
territory defined by the whole gamut of sexual prohibitions. Within this
territory all sexual activity, sexual allusions, and erotic stimulants are
forbidden. So within the immediate environs of the temple, and in the
area surrounding the place of sacrifice, any form of violence is strictly
forbidden. Beneficial and life-giving, but also dangerous, regulated sexual
violence (like ritual murder) is surrounded by a veritable buffer zone. If it
were granted free rein to propagate itself within the community, it would
become evil and destructive.

Primitive societies are generally more hemmed in by prohibitions than
Wester society has ever been. However, many of them are unfamiliar
with some of our own particular prohibitions. We must take care not to
interpret the relative liberty of these primitive peoples as presenting an
ideological contrast, as standing in direct opposition to the “repression”
characteristic of our own society, especially and most notoriously in the
sexual realm. The vast importance attributed to sexuality by humanists
and naturalists is, after all, a modern and Western phenomenon. In primi-
tive societies wherever sexual activity is neither legitimized (that is, seen
as ritual either in a strict or a broad sense) nor prohibited, it seems to be
regarded as a matter of little or no importance; in other words, it is too
trivial to provoke internal violence. This is the case in certain societies
with regard to the sexual activities of children and unmarried adolescents,
or with regard to sexual dealings with foreigners as well as, naturally, the
sexual activities among foreigners.

Prohibitions serve a basic function. They maintain a sort of sanctuary
at the heart of the community, an area where that minimum of nonvio-
lence essential to the survival of the children and the community’s cul-
tural heritage—essential, in short, to everything that sustains man’s
humanity—is jealously preserved. If prohibitions capable of performing
this function actually exist, one can hardly attribute them to the benefi-
cence of Nature (that good angel of complacent humanism, the last relic of
those optimistic theologies engendered by the deterioration of historical
Christianity). It should now be apparent that humanity’s very existence is
due primarily to the operation of the surrogate victim. We know that
animals possess individual braking mechanisms against violence; animals
of the same species never fight to the death, but the victor spares the life of
the vanquished. Mankind lacks this protection. Our substitution for the
biological mechanism of the animals is the collective, cultural mechan-
ism of the surrogate victim. There is no society without religion because
without religion society cannot exist.

Ethnologists should long since have drawn on their cumulative
evidence to explain the function of these prohibitions and even to
discover their origins. The act of violence performed in the course of a rite
or a festival points the way clearly enough, for it hinges on sacrificial
practices or on “totemic” ceremonies. And if we also examine the disas-
trous, or merely disturbing, consequences attributed to nonritualized
violations, we see that they always boil down to half-mythical, half-real
manifestations of the sacrificial crisis. Thus what motivates prohibition is
the fear of violence. Just because this violence can be disguised behind a
contagious illness, a drought, or a flood, we do not have the right to
dismiss this fear as “superstition.” Modern philosophers invariably choose
as representative the most “irrational” and bizarre (at any rate to modern
eyes) aspects of religious prohibitions. Thus they manage to convince
themselves that religion has no connection with reality.

This misconception cannot prevail much longer. The real function of
prohibition was brought to light by Freud; and although it was almost
immediately discarded by him, it has recently been reformulated with
great precision by Georges Bataille. To be sure, Bataille is primarily
inclined to treat violence in terms of some rare and precious condiment,
the only spice still capable of stimulating the jaded appetite of modern
man. Yet on occasion Bataille is able to transcend the decadent estheticism
he has so fervently espoused, and explain quite simply that “the prohib-
ition eliminates violence, and our violent impulses (including those resulting
from our sexual drives) destroy our inner calm, without which
human consciousness cannot exist."


Notes

1 Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, trans. James Harle
Bell, John Richard von Sturmer, and Rodney Needham (Boston, 1969), p. 491.

2 Freud, Standard Edition, vol. 13, Totem and Taboo, p. 126.

3 The author has in mind primarily the modern French school of Freudian
psychoanalysis
4 Freud,Totem and Taboo, p. 108
5 Ibid., p. 111
6 Ibid., p. 140
7 Ibid., p. 135
8 Ibid., p. 104
9 Ibid., p. 133
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid,, p. 138
12 Ibid., p. 155-56
13 Ibid,, p. 143
14 Ibid,, p. 144
15 Ibid., p. 141
16 Georges Bataille, LErotisme (Paris, 1965), p. 43.


Lévi-Strauss, Structuralism, and Marriage Laws


The unit of structure from which a kinship system is built up is the group
which I call an “elementary family,” consisting of a man and his wife with their
child or children. The existence of the elementary family creates three special
kinds of social relationships: that between parent and child, that between
children of the same parents (siblings), and that between husband and wife as
parents of the same child or children ... The three relationships that exist
within the elementary family constitute what I call the first order. Relation-
ships of the second order are those which depend on the connection of two
elementary families through a common member, and are such as father’s
father, mother’s brother, wife’s sister, and so on. In the third order are such as
father’s brother’s son and mother’s brother’s wife. Thus we can trace, if we
have the genealogical information, relationships of the fourth, fifth or nth
order.’

In outlining the basic premises of his own research, A. R. Radcliffe-
Brown sets forth the principles that prevailed in the study of kinship
before Lévi-Strauss arrived on the scene. In an article entitled “Structural
Analysis in Linguistics and in Anthropology,”* Lévi-Strauss quotes the
above passage as the counter position to his own methodology, which was
to set the pattern for structuralist studies of kinship.

According to Lévi-Strauss, the elementary family is based on marriage
and is therefore not an irreducible unit. Far from being elementary,
it is by definition composite. It is to be regarded as an end point rather
than a point of departure, the result of an exchange between two groups
that share no biological affiliations. “Kinship is allowed to establish
and perpetrate itself only through specific forms of marriage. In other
words, the relationships which Radcliffe-Brown calls ‘relationships of the
first order’ are a function of, and depend on, those which he considers
secondary and derived. The essence of human kinship is to require the
establishment of relations among what Radcliffe-Brown calls ‘elementary
families.” Thus, it is not the families (isolated terms) which are truly
‘elementary,’ but, rather, the relations between those terms.”*

We must be wary of “common sense,” which never loses sight of the
actual biological relationship linking Radcliffe-Brown’s. “elementary
family” and which refuses to regard the system as a system: “Of course, the
biological family is ubiquitous in human society. But what confers upon
kinship its socio-cultural character is not what it retains from nature, but,
rather, the essential way in which it diverges from nature. A kinship
system does not consist in the objective ties of descent or consanguinity
between individuals. It exists only in human consciousness; it is an arbi-
trary system of representations, not the spontaneous development of a
real situation.”*

The arbitrary element is assimilated to what has been called here the
“symbolic” character of the system. Two entities—in this case, two indi-
viduals—are brought together not by necessity, but by symbolic thought;
two cross-cousins, let us say, are joined in marriage, and the circum-
stances that “necessitated” the marriage can be attributed to social
convention rather than to any real need. The fact that a type of marriage
permitted or even required in one society is formally forbidden in another
makes this point clear.

Are we therefore to conclude that kinship systems in general are
essentially unnatural? As the last quotation from Lévi-Strauss demon-
strates, his pronouncements on this question are more cautious and more
finely shaded than some of his critics have led us to believe. After explain-
ing that the kinship system is not “the spontaneous development of a real
situation,” he remarks that “this certainly does not mean that the real
situation is automatically contradicted, or that it is to be simply ignored.
Radcliffe-Brown has shown, in studies that are now classic, that even
systems which are apparently extremely rigid and artificial, such as
the Australian systems of marriage-classes, take biological parenthood
carefully into account.””

The point seems clear enough in this context. Yet it is the very point
that could be misinterpreted in different circumstances through a hasty or
overzealous application of Lévi-Strauss’s own discoveries.

Lévi-Strauss’s homage to Radcliffe-Brown, whose views he had
convincingly refuted a few lines further back, is no mere formality. But
there is reason to question whether Lévi-Strauss’s acknowledgment deals
adequately with the issue. Kinship systems, we are informed, even those
“which are apparently extremely rigid and artificial ... take biological
parenthood carefully into account.” That is certainly true—as far as it
goes. There is, however, a good deal more to be said.

Men can “take into account” only those concepts that are already
accessible to their understanding. The phrase implies that the concept
of biological kinship exists outside the kinship system; that is, outside
culture. This notion strikes me as inconceivable. We must take care not to
confuse two distinct realities: (1) the fact of biological kinship, the actual
process of human reproduction; and (2) an understanding of these same
procedures, a recognition of the functioning of generation and con-
sanguinity. It is obvious that men must always behave according to the
first reality, insofar as they cannot reproduce themselves by any other
means than those prescribed by the laws of biology. This is as true for men
living within a “culture” as for those who might live in a “state of nature,”
where promiscuity would be the rule. As for the second reality, however,
that is a very different matter, for if sexual promiscuity prevailed, the
conditions would not exist that make possible the discovery of biological
laws.

It might be objected that I am drifting into abstractions. On the
contrary; my purpose is to expose a speculative assumption, tacitly
accepted and wholly without basis, that is part and parcel of the modern
naturalist myth—the belief that a particular affinity exists between the
“state of nature” and biological truth or even scientific truth in general.

There is, then, no difference between nature and culture in regard to
the mere biological facts of human reproduction. In regard to the under-
standing of these facts, however, a difference assuredly exists, and it is to
the detriment of nature. In order to appreciate the truth of this statement
we need only consider what happens to a litter of cats left to breed at
random. The result inevitably is a hopelessly tangled network of marriage
alliances, blood relationships, and inlaw relationships that would con-
found even the most assiduous student of “elementary” (or, as we would
say, “nuclear”) families.

No matter how bewildering such a spectacle might be, it would not rid
us of the conviction that the three types of family relationships described
by Radcliffe-Brown are indeed distinct and do exist. Even our most
advanced thinkers cannot persuade us that the distinction between father
and son, brother and sister, and mother and daughter are mere figments
of our deluded senses or the products of some deep-rooted obsession
fostered in our imaginations by a repressive cultural order. Once the
facts regarding reproduction have been established, it is impossible to
understand how they could ever have been misunderstood.

It should now be apparent that the establishment of basic biological
facts requires the formal recognition of the three distinct relationships—
marriage, direct descent, and consanguinity—defined by Radcliffe-Brown;
and that this formal recognition is dependent on a real separation—that is,
it is based on incest prohibitions and kinship systems.

Kinship systems, then, are essential to the ordering of biological data.
There is no kinship system, no matter how rigid and artificial, that will not
serve this function. As Lévi-Strauss has observed, the common basis of all
kinship systems is the recognition of a firm distinction between marriage
and consanguinity.

Although kinship systems vary greatly in scope, their premises remain
the same: marriage is always forbidden between parents and children and
between brothers and sisters. The exceptions to this pattern are so rare
and so special (usually having to do with ritual) that for all practical pur-
poses they can be regarded as exceptions that prove the rule. No matter
how harsh and excessive certain marriage ordinances may appear, no
matter how arbitrary and extreme their accompanying prohibitions (the
reverse aspect of these rules) may seem, the basis of the system remains
stable and comprehensible. Every kinship system defines the licit and the
illicit in sexual matters so as to exclude from the reproductive process
those sharing a parent-child or brother-sister relationship. Therefore, all
those who submit to its governance are obliged to acknowledge the basic
facts of human reproduction.

There is reason to believe that in the state of natural promiscuity the
connection between the sexual act and the birth of children (or even,
perhaps, the very idea of conception) would go unrecognized. Only
through the establishment of incest prohibitions could man hope to
obtain the quasi-experimental conditions necessary to the recognition of
the reproductive process. Only through incest prohibitions could man
introduce into his sexual life the stabilizing elements and systematic
exclusions without which the relevant linkages and comparisons could
not be made. Prohibitions, then, serve as a necessary controlling factor,
permitting man to recognize the results of sexual activity through
comparison with the sterility of abstinence.

Of course it is impossible to reconstruct the historical chain of events.
But that is not my concern here. My sole purpose is to carry the
Lévi-Straussian critique of the nuclear family a little further than
Lévi-Strauss himself has chosen to do. The three types of relationships
that constitute the nuclear family are the very ones that must be isolated
and made explicit in order to establish the basic biological premises, and
these relationships are in fact isolated and made explicit in all kinship
systems. The very concept of the nuclear family would be inconceivable
without kinship systems; however, it is always possible to deduce this
concept, at least in theory, from any imaginable kinship system, because
the distinctions that define the concept are an integral part of such
systems. It thus becomes clear that the nuclear family is the product rather
than the constituent of the kinship system, and to a far greater extent than
ethnologists have hitherto suspected. That is why it is not sufficient to say
that kinship systems, even the most complex and artificial of them, take
biological kinship “into account’; such systems are responsible for
the discovery of biological kinship, and their existence conditions all
understanding of it.

In short, the system itself has priority over the relationships it
establishes. If everything must be seen in connection with the system, that
is because the system truly comes first, even as regards biology, and not
because the system could theoretically flout biological laws. In fact the
system never flouts biology, at least as long as it adheres to the strict
separation of marriage and consanguinity. One must not think of the
system as stemming from its results, for the system alone makes these
results possible. The refusal to regard biology as a starting point is made
not because biology belongs in the realm of nature but because, on the
contrary, it belongs entirely to culture and is deduced from systems of
which the nuclear family is the smallest common denominator. The
system is all of a piece and must be viewed as such. We must take care
not to be distracted by its multiple variations, which in no way affect its
essence.

The three types of relationship that compose the nuclear family all have
real biological counterparts, yet they depend for their definition on incest
prohibitions. In other words, if there were no incest prohibitions there
would be no biological laws. But the purpose of the system is clearly not to
uncover biological truths. Such truths are not the only ones set forth by
the system; they are only part of a vaster statement. For that reason, they
must not be taken as the point of departure.

The proposition developed here takes no particular stand on the
controversial question, Are there cultures that are ignorant of the biology
of human reproduction? I would venture to say, however, that in its
handling of native testimony our theory can accommodate the skeptical
approach of contemporary researchers as well as the positive approach of
their predecessors. The possibility does indeed exist that certain cultures,
despite incest prohibitions, have never discovered the connection
between the sexual act and childbirth. Such a theory has been proposed
by a number of ethnologists, including Malinowski; it is based on long and
intimate contact with native life, and there is reason to doubt whether
the contemporary reaction against it is justified. We are asked to believe
that these ethnologists were hoodwinked by their informants, who were
simply pretending ignorance on the subject of conception.

This skeptical approach is ostensibly based on a new esteem for the
intellectual capacities of primitive man; but it may well stem from yet
another and still more insidious form of ethnocentrism. There is some-
thing vaguely demagogic about an appeal to common sense couched
in these terms: “Look here, you surely don’t believe that there are men so
stupid that they can’t see the connection between sex and procreation!
It’s just cultural provincialism that makes us assume that sort of thing
whenever we encounter someone a bit different from ourselves!”

As I have already said, the field of inquiry of this book does not extend
to this particular question; nor would its answer affect my argument. I
only wish to point out that modern attacks on the previous generation of
anthropologists are inspired by intellectual attitudes that can only per-
petuate an old tendency to remove basic biological truths from the
domain of culture and reattribute them to nature. The appeal to “common
sense,” the use of such daunting phraseology as “it is self-evident that...”
fits all too well with the misguided belief that kinship systems take bio-
logical facts into account independently of their other concerns. More
generally, we encounter here a still mythic view of nature, one that sees
nature as more receptive than culture to scientific verities. In fact there is
no truth, no matter how elementary, that is not mediated by culture. The
“great book of Nature” is an enigma one can only approach obliquely.

The signs of hesitancy and equivocation that we detect in Lévi-Strauss’s
efforts to situate a knowledge of true biological relationships within the
framework of the kinship system clearly stem from an inclination (almost
automatic today) to exclude scientific concepts from the company of
myths, rituals, and kinship systems. We are less concerned here with the
particular doctrine (which, moreover, displays certain inconsistencies) set
forth by Lévi-Strauss in the article cited above than with the implicit
principles that govern his thinking—and that are, in fact, almost universal
suppositions. The object of our own search remains our intellectual atti-
tude toward the nuclear family, which remains an obstacle, even after
Lévi-Strauss, if we now treat our own privileged treatment of it as nothing
but an arbitrary prejudice.

That kinship systems do not ignore or contradict biological kinship, but
rather take them “carefully into account,” is not self-evident to present-
day thinkers. It is difficult to admit that our own knowledge of the basic
facts of biology issues from the same thought process that produced the
most arbitrary and artificial distinctions of kinship systems. Yet in both
instances we have to do with the same type of intellectual operation, the
same process of symbolic thought: the gathering of, and distinguishing
between, entities whose union and separation are not made obvious in
nature. Nonetheless, it is clear that all the products of symbolic thought
cannot be considered equivalent. There is such a thing as false symbolic
thought (for example, the assumption that childbirth is the result of a
woman's possession by spirits) as well as true symbolic thought (for
example, the assumption that childbirth is the result of the sexual union
of man and woman).

There is no thought that is not symbolic in the structuralist sense of the
word. Nevertheless, it is no more appropriate for us to employ the term
today as a synonym for false than it was appropriate in the past to employ
it as a synonym for true. Lévi-Strauss was the first to emphasize that all
cultures contain an enormous store of knowledge that is useful because it
is grounded in the truth. If this were not the case, these cultures would
not have survived.

Whatever their differences, then, kinship systems are such that they
cannot disregard the basic biological facts, though in primitive cultures
these facts are somewhat lost in a maze of other distinctions.

All these distinctions are of a piece; that is, they make up a system. Our
tendency to grant prime consideration to biological matters lead us to
misunderstand the systematic aspect of the system. To yield to this
tendency is to produce elements that do not adhere, inexplicable aberra-
tions and exceptions that betray our inability to read the system correctly.
The structuralists are surely right in urging their ethnologist colleagues to
check their compulsion to take biological facts as a point of departure.

Why has this compulsion become second nature to us? Because our
own system corresponds exactly to that of the nuclear family. It reduces
the principle of exogamy to its simplest form and requires in consequence
only the minimum number of prohibitions necessary to bring out the
basic facts of generation.

This coincidence must be kept in mind when we consider the basic
differences between our society and primitive societies. Nowadays it is
often said that the concept of the modern family is just as arbitrary as the
assumptions of other kinship systems. That is both true and false. A
phenomenon can be arbitrary in relation to something and not arbitrary
in relation to something else. As far as the facts of procreation are con-
cerned, it is true that our system is as arbitrary as any other. For as far as
real biological functioning is concerned, it scarcely matters whether a sys-
tem forbids a man to marry either (1) his mother, his sisters, his daugh-
ters, and any of the women of tribe X; or (2) his mother, his sisters, and his
daughters only. The biological machinery works neither better nor worse
in the first case than in the second, and it might work just as well (pace
Westermarck) if there were no restrictions whatsoever. In regard to the
true facts of generation, then, the verdict is plain: all kinship systems are
equally arbitrary.

Differences do exist, however, between the nuclear family system and
all other systems. If it is true that all systems have a certain didactic value
in regard to biological knowledge, our system is certainly preeminent in
this regard. There are no longer any prohibitions in it that do not bring a
basic relationship to light, and there is no basic biological relationship that
is not revealed by a prohibition.

This difference between our own and other systems may appear slight.
Our extreme reduction of prohibitions may serve to underline certain
determined facts and bring them into sharper relief, but it discloses noth-
ing that more complex systems could not also disclose. The biological
example thus can suggest the relative singularity of our own system but
cannot demonstrate it.

I began by emphasizing the biological question in order to dispose of an
important stumbling block at the outset; namely, the confusion between
fact and knowledge. It was necessary to select the simplest, most access-
ible example by which to demonstrate the ability of symbolic thought,
even at its most mythic, to uncover scientifically significant relationships
and differences—an ability that would remain unperceived by cultural
relativism. But biology is too rudimentary an example to continue with.

Let us turn our attention to another realm, that of the cultural sciences,
and try to demonstrate that my approach provides ethnology with a new
and fertile field of activity.

For Lévi-Strauss, the language of kinship is a system of rules that
establishes a circuit of exchange between exogamic groups. Each time a
group transfers one of its women to another group, the beneficiary group
will respond by transferring one of its own women either to the first group
or to a third group, depending on the requirements of the system. This
response constitutes a new appeal, which will be answered accordingly.
The circle may be large or small, but it always closes itself. The questions
and responses emanating from the system always follow the same order,
at least in principle. Although this constitutes a language in the structuralist
sense, it fails to meet Chomsky’s criteria. For him, an essential trait is
missing: the infinite creativity of a true language, the constant potential
for inventing new phrases and expressing things never before expressed.

Thus we should bear in mind that the language of kinship is incomplete
and also that it is no longer spoken in certain societies, most particularly
our own. A system that restricts its prohibitions to a bare minimum, as
does ours, suppresses all positive rules. In other terms, it reduces the
language of matrimonial exchange to nothing. Wherever modern society
is found, marriages are no longer confined to a determined matrimonial
circuit. That does not mean, of course, that exogamy has vanished. Not
only does it still exist, but it manages to bring together the most disparate
groups, even transcending the formidable barriers of racial, economic, and
national prejudice. If sufficient information were available, we could
evaluate the mediative role of such cultural manifestations as clothing
styles, entertainment, and so forth in determining marriage alliances.
From the viewpoint of scientific determinism, exogamy is certainly a
determined factor, but it is no longer determined by the mediation of
socio-religious prescriptions to which everyone can and must refer. The
factors influencing these unions no longer possess a purely matrimonial
significance. Kinship no longer possesses a language of its own. And there
is no code of conduct telling people how to behave toward others and
what behaviour to expect in return, for expectations assume the form of
statistics and no longer apply to individual cases. The linguistic metaphor
must not be allowed to distract us from these essential differences.

Imperfect as it may be, the assimilation of the system to a language is a
precious tool, even in the case of primitive systems, as long as we remain
within the framework of these systems. It can help us to understand the
difference between all these systems and our own relative lack of system.
As everyone knows, the main obstacle to learning a foreign language is
one’s mother tongue. Our command of our native idiom is probably less
firm than its command of us; and it displays a certain jealous possessive-
ness by making it difficult for us to acquire any other language. Children’s
capacity to assimilate languages depends on their ability to forget. And the
greatest linguists often have no tongue they can any longer call their own.

The fact that we have eliminated the last vestiges of a matrimonial
language undoubtedly has something to do with our particular interest in
those who continue to speak such languages, as well as with our
exceptional ability to decipher and classify them. Our society can learn to
speak all the kinship languages because it speaks none of them. Not only
do we read all those systems that actually exist, but we even invent those
that do not. We can produce an infinite number of systems because we
have the matrix of all exogamic languages in our grasp. Between each of
the systems and the system of systems, between the kinship “languages”
and Lévi-Strauss’s own language in The Elementary Structures of Kinship,
the same differences exist as between the traditional structuralist concept
of language and Chomsky’s concept.

From this we can only conclude that our ethnological essence must be
in some way related to our vocations as ethnologists, linguists, and more
generally, field workers in the realm of culture. Clearly our kinship sys-
tem alone is not responsible for our ethnological inclinations; rather, the
two phenomena are parallel. The only society that has given itself over to
the pursuit of ethnological knowledge happens to be one that has con-
fined its system of prohibitions to the nuclear family. We cannot regard
this fact as simple coincidence.

In order to speak the language of scholarly research we must first lay
aside the language of rites and kinship, passing through the intermediary
dialects of “cultural activities” in their broadest sense. One stage follows
the other without a break, and at no point do the elements of “sacrificial”
misapprehension wholly disappear. Nonetheless, the elements of
comprehension increase in number, value, and coherence.

If ethnology is to become a true science it must reflect on its own
principles, and that reflection must transcend the limits of ethnology to
take in the sort of society that produces ethnologists—along with other
types of men, such as romantic heroes. In ethnological literature
the society that gives rise to ethnologists is always treated, as it were, in
parentheses. The reasons for this treatment can be traced back to the
assumption that this society has nothing in common with primitive
societies. Today, when it is boldly asserted that our own society is only one
among many, differing from other societies only in the way that all soci-
eties differ, this attitude has not vanished, but has become implicit rather
than explicit. This modern view is demonstrably false. And if we seek
more from ethnology than a means by which to quell the arrogance of our
fellow Westerners, we will have to face the fact that our kinship system
cannot be put on the same level as the systems of aboriginal Australians or
the Crow-Omahas. In our system there is nothing arbitrary in the forms of
knowledge to which we feel ourselves bound. We must not succumb to an
antiethnocentrism which, because it diverts us from essentials, has a
somewhat sacrificial character. Antiethnocentrism is the final and
parodoxical, but ultimately logical, maneuver of ethnocentrism itself.

Contemporary thinkers have drawn attention to the largely arbitrary
character of cultural systems. Most of the propositions that form these
systems are neither true symbolic thought or false symbolic thought (in
the sense of the two examples offered on page 241), but generally belong
to a third category: they have no reality oustide the cultures that give
rise to them. An example is the proposition that cross-cousins have a
particular affinity for matrimony.

This body of arbitrary elements is the “original sin” of human thought,
and it seems to increase as our skill in uncovering and interpreting these
elements improves. We cannot blame the researchers for minimizing or
even disregarding the elements of truth that lie hidden amidst the arbi-
trary. “Symbolic thought” in general is equated to mythic thought and
thus occupies a position some thinkers believe is privileged, but one that
proves in the long run both deceptive and unproductive, for it has lost all
link with reality. The cultural heritage of humanity is regarded with
suspicion. Its only interest lies in its “demystification” that is, in providing
the “demystifier” with a chance to display his forensic skills.

Humanity, we are told, has fallen victim to a vast mystification
unrecognized until now. This is cultural nihilism, and it is often associated
with a fetishistic cult of science. Because we have discovered the “original
sin” of human thought, we think ourselves free of it. What is now needed
is a radically different mode of thought, a new science that will allow us to
appreciate the absurdity of all previous thinking. And because this lie was
until recently immune from detection, the new scientific approach must
be altogether unconnected with the past. Inevitably, it will take the shape
of a unique discovery by some inspired being who has little in common
with ordinary mortals, or even with his own past. In severing the cord
that attached us to the matrix of all mythic thought, this liberator of
humanity will have delivered us from dark ancestral falsehood and led us
into the luminous world of truth. Our hard and pure science is to be the
result of a coupure épistémologique, an epistemological revolution that is
totally unexpected and for which we are entirely unprepared.

This scientific angelism springs from a deep-rooted reluctance,
philosophical and even religious in origin, to admit that truth can coexist
with the arbitrary and perhaps even derive from it. Certainly such an idea
runs counter to our habitual modes of thought. And the proposition that
true thought and so-called mythic thought are one and the same seems
nothing short of scandalous. Perhaps it is because there are so few certain
truths in the domain of culture that we are so eager to have the origins
clear, easily understood, and accessible to reason.

The dualism of science and nonscience dates from the beginning of the
scientific era and has assumed a great variety of forms. It grows more
acute when we approach a foreign culture and are unable to grasp it. It is
undoubtedly what prompted Lévi-Strauss to express mild astonishment
that even the most artificial of kinship systems “carefully took into
account” biological facts. In The Savage Mind Lévi-Strauss attempted to
formulate this dualism, in highly attenuated and nuanced form, under the
categories of “savage thought” and “bricolage”® on the one hand, and “the
thought of the engineers” on the other.

We find in the work of Lévi-Strauss a strong tendency to relegate truth
either to the domain of “natural” thought or the domain of “engineering”;
or else to a loosely defined combination of the two that he designates as
“naturalist thought.” In his article on structural analysis, for instance,
Lévi-Strauss asserts that the study of kinship systems obliges us to
renounce “naturalistic thought”—as if it were not “symbolic,” too—not
because this mode of thought is intrinsically false, but because, on the
contrary, it adheres too closely to the truth and is thus incapable of taking
into account the fantasies of “symbolic thought.” Structural ethnology
thereby assumes a transitional and transitory quality; it is seen as a detour
that uses savage thought against itself in order to “dissolve” it, to banish
the hallucinations of our culture and clear the way for the union of nature
and science.

All these questions converge on a fundamental question: the origin of
symbolic thought. And if symbolic systems are never “the spontaneous
development of an actual situation,” if there is a rupture between nature
and culture, then the question becomes pressing. Lévi-Strauss and the
structuralists in general acknowledge this problem of origins only in an
abstract fashion. The passage from nature to culture, they say, is assured
by “the permanent traits of human nature’; the problem is a false one,
falling outside the domain of science. The myths, which falsely dramatize
this passage by means of imaginary catastrophes, only serve to conceal its
true nature. Totem and Taboo is seen in this view as another origin myth,
with little to offer beyond a certain curiosity value. The work should, in
short, be treated like any other myth.

It might be well to return to the closing lines of “Structural Analysis in
Linguistics and in Anthropology,” because of what they say, and fail to
say, about the viewpoints we are trying to assess here; and also because of
the curious note of hesitancy they reveal. Most untypically, the problem
raised by the advent of symbolic thought is here viewed as a real problem,
though we cannot be sure whether the problem has already been
resolved: “Although it may be legitimate or even inevitable to fall back
upon a naturalistic interpretation in order to understand the emergence of
symbolic thinking, once the latter is given, the nature of the explanation
must change as radically as the newly appeared phenomenon differs from
those which have preceded and prepared it.”

If symbolic thinking is a “given,” is this because we grasp its emergence
or, on the contrary, because we do not? Does its emergence pass
unnoticed? Does it take the form of a silent mutation, as many previous
references either assert or imply; or is it a real, discernible event? The
preceding passage seems to lean toward the second possibility, permitting
us to view the symbolic advent as a legitimate and even inevitable subject
of inquiry. But what are those phenomena that “preceded and prepared”
this event? How must we envision a line of inquiry apparently committed
to the “naturalist interpretation”?

Lévi-Strauss is the first to raise the essential question, even though he
does so indirectly and, one might almost say, inadvertently. The reader
knows my response to the question. My task now is to show, or at least to
suggest, that this is the only approach capable of exposing the deficiency
of a contemporary mode of thought that circles around the problem of
origins without ever coming to grips with it—that in fact foregoes the
opportunity to come to grips with it in favor of pure formalism.

The origin of symbolic thought lies in the mechanism of the surrogate
victim; such has been the burden of my argument, particularly in my
analyses of the myths of Oedipus and Dionysus. It is a fundamental
instance of “arbitration” that gives rise to the dual presence of the arbitrary
and the ¢rue in all symbolic systems.

Collective murder restores calm, in dramatic contrast to the hysterical
paroxysms that preceded it. The conditions favorable to thought coincide
with the death of the surrogate victim. Men’s minds turn back to the
miracle in order to perpetuate or renew it; and in order to accomplish this
they need to reflect upon that miracle, to rethink it. Myths, rituals, and
kinship systems are the first fruits of this endeavor.

To refer to the origin of symbolic thought is to speak as well of the origin
of language. If the mechanism of the surrogate victim gives birth to
language and imposes itself as the first object of language, it is easy to see
why language should first state the conjunction of best and worst, the
divine epiphany, the rite that commemorates this epiphany and the myth
that recalls it. For a long time language remains imbued with the sacred;
thus there is good reason why it should long appear as a vassal of the
sacred, obedient to its every command.

Cultural significations naturally include an arbitrary element, for they
establish differences where formerly the symmetry of the doubles pre-
vailed and substitute the stability of fixed meanings for the vertiginous
alternation of violent reciprocity. For example, they relegate “plague” to
one category, and “patricide” and “incest” to another. The machinery of
discrimination plays us false as long as it applies itself to those whom
nothing distinguishes. Indeed, it must play us false in order to work effect-
ively, in order to bring about the differentiated unity of the whole com-
munity. In the midst of a living culture men are incapable of recognizing
the arbitrary nature of the significations produced by this mysterious
mechanism.

The processes of discrimination, exclusion, and conjunction are the
products of the generative process. They are applied first to this same
process, and this application gives rise to religious thought. But they do
not confine themselves to religious thought alone; they are the mech-
anism for all orders of thought. And we cannot afford the luxury of rejecting
or even denigrating them, for the truth is that they do their work well.
When applied to something other than the original process, they bring to
light veritable differences, analyze real phenomena, and encompass data
of a nonrelative variety—for instance, the data of human generation. It is
not correct to say that these data have recently become “verifiable” under
modern laboratory conditions that have transformed them into scientific
truths. They are scientific truths today because they have always been
scientific truths. Basic discoveries may result from bricolage.

In the realm of religion, to be sure, error prevails. But even here we
are not dealing with anything imaginary or gratuitous, as the modern
rationalists arrogantly assume. Primitive religion is not given over to the
phantoms, fantasies, and aberrant impulses that modern man thinks he
alone has discarded. Rather, and quite simply, religion fails to grasp the
mechanism of the surrogate victim, just as we still fail to grasp it. This
perpetuation of the same error is what links our own thought to primi-
tive thought and what, paradoxically, compels us to regard the latter as
very different from our own, even though the two modes of thought
are very similar. This condescending attitude toward the primitive is
nothing more than an extension of a primitive attitude—that is, an
indefinite prolongation of misunderstanding of the role of the surrogate
victim.

The generative process plays a major role in primitive culture but passes
unnoticed in ours. This fact has dictated enormous changes in many
aspects of our life and in our range of knowledge, but it alters nothing in
regard to the basic misapprehension that continues to govern us and to
shield us from our own violence and from awareness of this violence. It is
this chronic primitivism that prompts us to dismiss as mere illusion any-
thing that draws our attention to the true state of things; and it is this
same primitivism that prevents us from recognizing that falsehood
in religious thought is something quite different from mere error; that
falsehood has protected mankind from self-destruction.

Men may be even more dependent on the surrogate victim than we
have indicated. It is the surrogate victim who provides men with the
will to conquer reality and the weapons for all victorious intellectual
campaigns—having first secured society against violence. The myths of
symbolic thought can be compared to a larva’s cocoon: without this
shelter no development could take place.

To explain the preponderance of the arbitrary in primitive culture, we
must understand that these societies are closer to the generative act of
arbitration than we are, and we must realize that this proximity informs
every aspect of their historical reality. We can envision this original arbi-
trary act as overflowing its limits and engendering a superabundance of
differences; historical societies may well offer a weakened image of this
process when, after a period of chaos and turmoil, they do a volte-face
and adopt a rigid, hierarchic, and highly compartmentalized mode of
existence. Without making too much of the analogy, I might say that
certain highly subdivided cultures, confined to the languages of ritual and
kinship, are closer both temporally and temperamentally to the original
impact of the generative violence than are the more mobile and flexible
societies whose systems of social structure are less in evidence. The omni-
present and inflexible difference may well assure stability, but it will
certainly discourage intellectual speculation, especially speculation
regarding the origins of culture.

In order for men to make discoveries about their own culture, codified
rituals must give way to an agile mode of thinking that uses the same
mechanisms as religion with a virtuosity that religion never approached.
The cultural order itself must have begun to disintegrate, and the over-
flow of differences must have subsided—not so much, however, as to
provoke a new outbreak of violence, which would in turn generate new
differences. For reasons unknown to us, primitive societies never meet
these conditions. When the cycle of violence begins, it also comes to
an end with such rapidity that the opportunity for making major
self-discoveries hardly exists.

Modem Western society, however, can be described in terms of an
exceptionally far-ranging and drawn-out critical cycle. The very essence
of modern society might be said to be its ability to sustain the possibility
for new discoveries in the midst of an ever-worsening sacrificial crisis—
not, to be sure, without many signs of anxiety and stress. There is room
for discovery in the natural sciences, in the field of cultural significations,
and finally, on the specific subject of the arbitrary generative act.

The extreme poverty of our kinship system in comparison with those
of primitive societies seems a sign of crisis in itself. The Western world is
in a perpetual state of crisis, and the crisis is always spreading. As its
ethnological basis falls away, its specific nonspecificity becomes more
pronounced. The Western world has always had a penchant for anthro-
pology. And that penchant becomes more urgent as the situation around
us worsens.

The present crisis affects all aspects of scholarship, its polemical
characteristics as well as its rate of progress. Our anthropological vocation
stems from the general nature of Western society and increases in inten-
sity to keep step with the crisis; just so Oedipus’ investigation kept pace
with the accelerating rhythm of the tragic crisis. The crisis could
determine as well the overall pattern of our researches and successive
discoveries and the order in which the theoretical premises keep changing.

All scholarly priorities are historically determined, whether or not research
in the strict sense is involved. Like all cultures, our culture wears away from
the periphery toward the center. The newly emerging social sciences exploit this
deterioration in a rational, systematic fashion. The debris of the process serves
as the object of objective knowledge; thus the positive regulations of kinship
(as opposed to the prohibitions) and, more generally, its systems of expression
become in structural ethnology the object of positive knowledge.

The essential characteristic of structuralism is that it puts the emphasis
on positive regulations. If the prohibition and the regulation constitute
two opposite poles of the same object, there is good reason to inquire
which is the essential one. Lévi-Strauss poses this very question, and
resolves it in favor of the regulation: “Exogamy has a value less negative
than positive. ... It asserts the social value of other people, and ... it
prohibits endogamous marriage only in order to introduce, and to pre-
scribe, marriage with a group other than the biological family, certainly
not because a biological danger is attached to consanguineous marriage,
but because exogamous marriage results in social benefit.”*

We could easily cite fifteen or twenty such declarations, all perfectly
explicit, which prove that Lévi-Strauss’s work, far from displaying a
“passion for incest,” is remarkable for its dispassionate approach:

They do not conceive of the prohibition as such, ie., in its negative aspect; the
prohibition is merely the reverse or counterpart of a positive obligation, which
alone is present and active in the consciousness. . . .

Marriage prohibitions . . . are prohibitions only secondarily and derivatively.
Rather than a prohibition on a certain category of persons, they are a prescrip-
tion directed towards another category. In this regard, how much more pene-
trating is native theory than are so many modern commentaries! There is
nothing in the sister, mother or daughter which disqualifies them as such.
Incest is socially absurd before it is morally culpable.

The prohibition of incest is less a rule prohibiting marriage with the mother,
sister or daughter, than a rule obliging the mother, sister or daughter to be
given to others.’

I have already broached the problem of priorities and adopted a point of
view diametrically opposed to that of Lévi-Strauss: for me, prohibitions
come first. This perspective is necessitated by my overall approach. Positive
exchanges are merely the reverse of prohibitions, the results of a series of
maneuvers or avoidance taboos designed to ward off outbreaks of rivalry
among the males. Terrified by the fearful consequences of endogamous
reciprocity, men have created the beneficial reciprocity of exogamic
exchange. It is only natural that in a smoothly functioning system, posi-
tive regulations should move to the forefront as the awareness of danger
grows dim. At the outset, however, the matrimonial rules are like those
perfectly choreographed gestures unwittingly executed by characters in
classic comedy and inspired by sentiments wholly foreign to the dance,
such as jealousy or fear.

Lévi-Strauss is undoubtedly correct to minimize the fascination for
incest as such; insofar as it is a cultural phenomenon, it constituted a
manifestation of the sacrificial crisis. But this does not mean that prohib-
itions do not come first. If they did not, it would be virtually impossible to
situate our own society within the universal ethnological pattern.

If rules are to be considered the cornerstone of a society, then we are
faced with something of a problem in regard to our own society, which is
deficient in positive regulations and has, in fact, discarded everything
except the basic exogamic prohibition. The structuralists hasten to assure
us that there is nothing unique about our society. Yet in placing their
emphasis on regulations they make it appear very unique indeed. Any
attempt to minimize the singularity of our society only serves, by a process
of self-denigration that still has its roots in religion, to raise it to the top
once more. If we wish to situate ourselves in relation to other cultures we
must refine the current view of our ethnocentrism and resign ourselves to
the relative uniqueness of our society.

Contemporary thought is in chaos, as it must be when progress is real.
Where it still survives, it displays pathological symptoms. Thought, in fact,
is caught up in a circle, the very circle drawn for us by Euripidean tragedy.
In striving to escape from the circle, thought only enters more deeply into
it, and as the radius of the circle shrinks, thought moves ever faster, spin-
ning itself into an obsession. However, there is no such thing as an obses-
sion pure and simple, as the legion of timorous anti-intellectuals would
have us believe; and it is not by breaking out of the circle that thought will
ultimately free itself, but by penetrating to its very center, while somehow
managing to avoid the pitfall of madness.

Nothing now exists to interfere with a full revelation of violence—not
even violence itself, which men and its own extraordinary growth have
combined to deprive of that freedom of moment that formerly assured the
efficiency of the generative mechanism and the repression of the truth.
The trap that the Western Oedipus has set for himself will snap closed at
the precise moment when the quest is finished, for trap and quest, here
again, are one and the same thing.

Today the reign of violence is made manifest. It assumes the awesome
and horrific form of technological weaponry. These weapons, as the
“experts” blandly inform us, are what is keeping the whole world more
or less in line. The idea of “limitless” violence, long scorned by sophisti-
cated Westerners, suddenly looms up before us. Absolute vengeance,
formerly the prerogative of the gods, now returns, precisely weighed
and calibrated, on the wings of science. And it is this force, we are told,
that prevents the first planetary society, the society that already
encompasses or will soon encompass the whole of humanity, from
destroying itself.

It seems increasingly clear that the pressure of violence or the insistence
of truth (for whom man acts as a kind of torchbearer) has forced modern
man to come face to face with this same violence or truth. For the
first time he is confronted with a perfectly straight-forward and even
scientifically calculable choice between total destruction and the total
renunciation of violence.

It is something more than mere chance that has led to the coincidence
of these remarkable events, linking the indubitably real progress of the
so-called human sciences with the slow but steady progress of knowledge
toward an understanding of the surrogate victim and of the violent origins
of all human culture.

Ethnological structuralism works at uncovering differences everywhere.
Superficially, it might be said to be the simple antithesis of an older ethno-
logical approach, that of Lévy-Bruhl, which refused to see differences
anywhere. Lévy-Bruhl thought that he had located the “primitive mind”
in certain aspects of myth and religion, and he postulated a permanent
inability on the part of primitive peoples (the Australian aborigines, for
example) to discern differences. He went so far as to suggest that these
aborigines could hardly distinguish between men and kangaroos. The
structuralists have replied that as far as kangaroos are concerned, the
aborigines have a thing or two to teach the ethnologists.

It sometimes seems as if the variations of twentieth century ethnology
run parallel to the variations in esthetics and to intellectual fads in gen-
eral. Lévy-Bruhl’s primitive man, lost in the mists of his mythic stupor, is
succeeded by the structuralist chess player, elaborating intricate systems
with imperturbable ease. We are constantly shuttling between these
extremes, which serve to create an illusion of change by means of
increasingly bizarre constructs, but which in reality change very little.

Lévy-Bruhl and the structuralists cannot be put on the same level,
because differentiated structures have a definite autonomy, a textual real-
ity that the sacred never possesses or possesses only in appearance. Struc-
tural analysis cannot deal with everything, but within its limits it is highly
satisfactory.

The sacred concerns itself above all with the destruction of differences,
and this nondifference cannot appear as such in the structure. It can only
appear (as we saw in Chapter 2) in the guise of a new and somewhat
equivocal kind of difference—a double, multiple, monstrous, fantastic
difference, but one that is nonetheless meaningful. In Mythologiques, mon-
sters are ranked alongside tapirs and peccaries as if they constituted real
zoological species. And in a sense they do. For in myths the role of
violence in destroying and producing significations is muted and dis-
guised, and those aspects of the myth that refer to its own origins are
woven into a tissue of enigmatic allusions. Structuralism cannot penetrate
this enigma because it deals only with differential systems; because,
strictly speaking, only differential systems are directly observable.

As long as meaning is healthy, the sacred is absent. It remains outside
the structure, untouched by structural ethnology, banished by structural-
ism. In a sense this elimination of the sacred constitutes real progress, for
it is finally accomplished in a thorough and systematic manner. And
though accompanied by ideological prejudices, it is not dependent on
them for its efficacy. Structuralism constitutes a negative but indispens-
able stage in the discovery of the sacred, for it does away with the confu-
sion that has previously prevailed. Thanks to structuralism, it is possible
to distinguish the finite quality of sense—of structure—from the
infinite quality of the sacred, that inexhaustible reservoir from which all
differences flow and into which they all converge.

We now know that the sacred reigns supreme wherever a cultural order
has not yet taken hold, has only begun to take hold, or has lost its hold
entirely. The sacred also reigns over structure: engenders, organizes,
observes, and perpetuates it or, on the contrary, mishandles, dissolves,
transforms, and on a whim destroys it. But the sacred is not actually
present in structure in the sense that it is present everywhere else.

Structuralism makes this relationship clear, but it is incapable of
expressing it directly, for structuralism is itself locked into the structure, a
prisoner of the synchronic, unable to perceive a change in terms of
violence or fear of violence. Structuralism has its limits, and it is precisely
these limits that make the disappearance of the sacred seem natural to the
structuralists. Yet they can no more reply to the question, “Where did the
sacred disappear?” than they can reply to the accusation of overemphasiz-
ing binary oppositions. Their proper reply to this latter charge should be
that binary oppositions are predominant because there are never more
than two antagonists or two sides in any conflict, and as soon as a third
adversary appears, the two others either join forces in opposing him or he
elects to join one or the other side.

To pass beyond the limits of structuralism we must first pause to
consider the doubtful significations, those that imply both too little and
too much: twins, illnesses, all forms of contaminations and contagions,
inexplicable reversals of meaning, unexpected growths and shrinkages,
strange excrescences and deformations, and all forms of the monstrous
and the bizarre. Nor, of course, should we overlook sexual and other
transgressions, acts of violence, or behavior that is in any way exceptional,
especially when such behavior seems to be in defiance of an explicit
gesture of communal unanimity.

The opening pages of Lévi-Strauss’s The Raw and the Cooked seem to
abound in signs relating to mythic birth: incest, vengeance, betrayal by
either a brother or brother-in-law, collective metamorphoses or destruc-
tions as preambles to acts of foundation and creation—and all of them
attributed to culture heroes whose antagonisms have somehow been
aroused.

In a Bororo myth the sun commands the inhabitants of a village to cross
a river by means of a footbridge, which collapses under their combined
weight. All the villagers perish with the exception of the culture hero,
who “could only walk slowly because his legs were deformed,” and there-
fore lagged behind the rest.'® The hero brings the drowned villagers back
to life under different forms: “The hair of those who were sucked into the
whirlpools turned wavy or curly; the hair of those who drowned in calm
waters was fine and smooth.”"! They return in separate groups and on a
selective basis. In a Tenetehara myth the culture hero, Tupan, is furious at
learning that his godchild had been mistreated by the relatives in whose
care he had placed the boy, and he orders the child

to gather all the feathers he could find and to spread them around the edge of
the village. Then Tupan set fire to the feathers, and the entire village was
surrounded by walls of flame. The inhabitants ran from side to side, but they
were unable to escape. Little by little their cries became lower until they were
transformed into the grunts of pigs; at the same time the people began to take
on the form of peccaries and wild pigs. A few of them escaped into the dense
forest, and the wild pigs that inhabit the forest today are their descendants.
Tupan made his godchild, Marana ywa, the owner of the wild pigs.’

In an interesting variant, the culture hero “puffed clouds of [tobacco]
smoke into the interior. The occupants became dizzy, and when the
demiurge cried out to them, ‘Eat your food!’ they thought he was order-
ing them to copulate. They proceeded to have coitus and made the usual
grunting sounds while doing so. They were all changed into wild pigs.”"*

This passage offers a clear indication of the “mystical” role played by
tobacco and drugs in shamanistic and other practices. Tobacco contributes
to the sense of dizziness induced by the sacrificial crisis. The reciprocal
violence expressed by the inhabitants running “from side to side” in the
first version is reinforced by the sexual promiscuity in the second, the
result of an explicit loss of significations.

Although Lévi-Strauss is not referring specifically to a sacrificial crisis,
he is clearly referring to the birth, if not the rebirth, of significations: “It is
clear that the myths I am comparing all offer an original solution to the
problem of the change-over from continuous quantity to discrete quan-
tity.”'* Thus we are indeed dealing with significance-producing mechan-
isms, for “in any field a system of significances can be constructed only on
the basis of discrete quantities.”

However, Lévi-Strauss always views the production of sense as a purely
logical problem, an act of symbolic mediation. The role of violence
remains hidden. In exposing this role to view, we are not merely evoking
the “affective” aspects of the myth—its ability to inspire mystery and
terror—but calling attention to the violence that dominates all aspects of
myth, including its logic and meanings. Violence is behind all mythic
themes, and only an understanding of its role is capable of bestowing a
coherence on these themes; for without sacrificing structure, we can
recover its lost origins and confer on myth an essential function.

The analytical method applied in previous chapters to Greek tragedy
has been primarily employed to decipher the myths of which the tragedies
themselves constitute the first efforts at decipherment. In concluding the
present chapter I will try to show that this method loses none of its validity
when applied outside the realm of Greek tragedy and mythology.

Because the last two chapters have been largely devoted to incest
prohibitions and marriage regulations, it might be interesting to examinc
a myth that attributes the same origin to both of them and lends support
to our theory as a whole. The myth in question comes from the Tsimshian
Indians who inhabit the Pacific coast of Canada."

A chieftain’s son falls in love with the daughter of his mother’s
brother—that is, his cross-cousin. The girl, out of sheer perversity,
demands that the young man prove his love by disfiguring himself. The
young man therefore scars first his left cheek, then his right; and the girl,
horrified by his ugliness, banishes him from her sight. The brokenhearted
young man flees the country, intent only on death. Finally he arrives in
the land of Chief Pestilence, Master of Deformities. A crowd of tribesmen
surround their leader, all of them mutilated and crippled. They are danger-
ous, for anyone who responds to their advances comes to resemble them.
The young man is careful to ignore them, and the chief agrees to restore
his features, in fact to make him handsomer than before. The young man
is boiled in a magic pot, from which the chief’s daughter extracts his
stripped and whitened bones. He is then brought back to life, resplendent
with beauty.

Now it is the girl’s turn to fall in love with her cousin, and her cousin’s
turn to demand the same proof of love she had asked of him. The girl scars
both sides of her face and is scornfully rejected by the young man. Frantic
to have her lost beauty restored, she too repairs to the court of Chief
Pestilence; but unlike the young man, she accepts the tribesmen’s invita-
tion to join them. Thereupon they make the unfortunate young woman
one of their own, crippling and mutilating her and then casting her out
to die.

The reader will have recognized in this tale a number of familiar
themes. All the people in the myth either disfigure others, demand that
others disfigure themselves, try in vain to disfigure others, or actually
disfigure themselves—all of which amounts ultimately to the same thing.
One cannot exert violence without submitting to it: that is the law of
reciprocity. Everybody in the myth comes to resemble everybody else.
The danger threatening newcomers at the hands of Chief Pestilence’s
tribesmen is in fact visited by both cousins on each other. Pestilence and
mutilation signify one and the same reality: the sacrificial crisis.

In the relationship between the two cousins the woman initially has
the upper hand. She incarnates beauty, the man ugliness; she is free of
desire, while he is caught in its thrall. The relationship is then reversed.
Differences cancel each other out; a symmetry is constantly generated,
invisible in each synchronic moment taken separately but visible in the
accumulation of successive moments. This is what constitutes the non-
difference of the sacrificial crisis, a truth forever inaccessible to the two
partners who live out the relationship in the form of alternating differ-
ences. The symmetry of the overall picture is reflected in the two sides of
the face, each scarred in turn. The same details are reiterated throughout
the story (until the conclusion), but never simultaneously.

Between the two cousins and Chief Pestilence’s tribesmen there is the
same relationship as that between the protagonists of Oedipus the King and
the Theban plague victims. The only way to avoid contagion is to turn a
deaf ear to the appeals of the enemy brothers. On the level of the tribes-
men—that is, the collectivity—the myth speaks objectively. It does what
we ourselves did in our opening chapters: it “short-circuits” the alternat-
ing differences. It does so with good reason, for this difference only ends
in similarity. The reciprocal mutilation takes the direct form of a loss of
differences, a “becoming the same” at the hands of those whom violence
has already made identical. When we note that this process consists of
turning men into doubles as well as into monsters, it is clear that we are
dealing here with a sacrificial crisis.

Mutilation symbolizes the working of the crisis in dramatic fashion.
Clearly, it must be viewed both as the creation of fearfully deformed
beings and as the elimination of all distinguishing characteristics, all the
salient features of these beings. The process imposes uniformity and elimi-
nates differences, but it never succeeds in establishing harmony. In the
image of monstrous mutilation the procedures of reciprocal violence are
expressed in such powerfully condensed form that they appear bizarre,
indecipherable, and “mythic.”

Lévi-Strauss mentions this Tsimshian myth in one of his essays; he calls
it a “horrific little fiction.”'* We prefer to describe it as a remarkable fiction
about the horrific human relationships occasioned by reciprocal violence.
In any case, the term “fiction” is hardly worth retaining. Although the
myth itself is foreign to our Western mode of thought, the relationship
between the cousins introduces an element that our classic theater tra-
ditionally treats in terms of tragic conflict or comic misunderstanding and
that also bears a striking resemblance to the sentiment of love-jealousy
found in the novels of Stendhal, Proust, and Dostoevsky.

The prince and princess claim and obtain from each other the same
violent loss of difference that Chief Pestilence’s tribesmen inflict on those
who are mad enough to join their ranks. All differences dissolve and
disappear, yet in a sense they remain inviolate and whole. We are never
told in the myth that the differences between the tribesmen and the two
cousins, and more importantly between the two cousins themselves, have
been eliminated; and the destruction of the symmetry between the
cousins at the conclusion forcefully affirms the primacy of differences.

There is nothing in the relationship between the cousins to justify this
loss of symmetry, except for the fact that the Indian girl, like Oedipus,
initiated the whole action. This identifying of the origin with an instance
of impure violence is not wholly satisfactory. Once again we find our-
selves confronted by the basic contradiction that underlies Oedipus the King
and The Bacchae. While the course of the relationships reveal a constant
erosion of all the differences, and while the mythic action tends toward
the perfect symmetry of the undifferentiated relationships, the outcome
of the myth arbitrarily reverses the process. The asymmetry of the mes-
sage is here again in direct contrast to the burgeoning symmetry apparent
on every other level. Everything leads us to suspect that this contradiction
must be linked to a specific event that lies buried in the myth’s conclu-
sion—the murder of the girl, who to all appearances performs the role of
surrogate victim. Once again the unanimity-minus-one of collective vio-
lence recreates mythic differences, which are themselves the issues of a
violent undifferentiation taking place throughout the narrative.

The violence to which the young woman is subjected at the hands of
Chief Pestilence’s tribesmen resembles the violence that preceded it in
every way but one: its finality. The act serves definitively to stabilize a
difference that otherwise would have continued to alternate between the
two protagonists. It is the whole mob of tribesmen, the whole community,
which falls upon the girl and tears her limb for limb with their naked
hands. Once again we recognize a Dionysiac sparagmos. And once again
we recognize the generative, because unanimous, act of mob murder.

The return to differentiated harmony is based on the arbitrary
expulsion of the surrogate victim. The metamorphosis of the chieftain’s
son is also based on this generative violence, even though it happens to
precede it in the mythic sequence and is integrated in part to the reci-
procal interplay. It is the other face of the generative violence, the return to
beneficence following the paroxysm of malevolence. That is why this
metamorphosis also abounds in elements that designate and disguise the
mechanism of the surrogate victim. The strange technique of the happy
metamorphosis resembles a shamanistic initiatory dream, of which there
are many examples in American Indian folklore—dreams about dead men
who are revived when their body or bones have been trampled on.'’ This
technique can perhaps be compared to a sacrificial practice, referred to
earlier (see p. 103), in which the crowd stamps on the victim himself or on
his burial place. It should also be noted, however, that the final meta-
morphosis occurs with stripped and whitened bones—that is, with human
remains that are free from all taint of corruption or decay. The meta-
morphosis of the chieftain’s son thus constitutes a return from the dead. It
is the happy result of an act of supreme violence, perpetrated by restored
unanimity. The reconquest of beauty coincides with the renovation of the
cultural order. And Chief Pestilence himself incarnates all the successive
aspects of violence; master of deformities and metamorphoses, sole arbiter
of the ultimate game, he plays the same role as Dionysus in The Bacchae.

All the significant differentiations of the myth—the difference between
the protagonists and Chief Pestilence’s tribesmen, then the sexual differ-
ence between the protagonists, together with the fact that they are cross-
cousins—all these can be traced back to the act of generative violence. The
mythic action, the process of violent undifferentiation, cannot fail to upset
the norm established at the myth’s outset: the difference, which is
now normative as well as significant, enjoining these two cross-cousins of
different sex to marry. An unstable combination of undifferentiation and
difference, the myth is inevitably presented in terms of the violation of a
tule established by itself. This is the way it was originally told to Franz
Boas by his native informant. Ever since the girl in the myth met her
unhappy fate, he was told, young girls have been married off to their
cousins regardless of their personal preferences.

It is interesting to compare our myth with the rites performed at the
marriage of cross-cousins of a princely family of the Tsimshian people:
“when the prince and the princess have been joined together, the tribes-
men of the young man’s uncle begin to shake; then the tribesmen of the
girl’s uncle begin to shake, and a combat breaks out between the two
groups. Stones are thrown, and many heads are battered. The scars and
wounds . . . [serve] as proof of the wedding contract.”"*

Up to this point the presence of the sacrificial crisis behind the myth was
only a hypothesis, prompted by the belief that the mutilation image was
based on a real occurrence. The matrimonial myth confirms this hypo-
thesis by incorporating the violence in question; ritual violence, to be sure,
but perfectly real and clearly linked to the theme of mutilation in the
myth: “Stones are thrown and man heads battered.” It is easy to imagine a
twentieth-century Cervantes or Moliére planting in the midst of those
flying stones a devotee of the self-referential text in order to prove to him
that some metaphors are more striking than others. The Indians had no
doubts on this subject: “The scars and wounds .. . [serve] as proof of the
wedding contract.” The sacrificial nature of this violence is further con-
firmed by an additional fact communicated to Boas by another native
informant. Among the Niquas, whose marriage customs are similar to
those of the Tsimshians, the battle between the two groups can reach such
a pitch of intensity that one of the slaves on the fiancé’s side is killed. The
sacrificial aspect of this action is implicit, but obvious. It is known in
advance to what side the victim will belong and that he will be a slave and
not a free man—that is, somebody wholly apart from the community,
whose death will not risk unleashing a real crisis. Although foreseen, the
death retains a problematical quality that recalls the unforeseeable advent
of the surrogate victim, for a man is not killed on every such occasion.
When a man is killed, his death is looked upon as a good omen, a sign that
the couple will never separate.

The diverse mutilations described in the Tsimshian myth and ritual will
undoubtedly prompt the psychoanalytically inclined to see the whole
affair in terms of “castration.” The loss of difference is a more compre-
hensive interpretation. The theme of violent undifferentiation includes
that of castration, whereas the castration theme cannot possibly include
all the elements covered by violent undifferentiation.

Ritual violence is intended to reproduce an original act of violence.
There is nothing mythic about this original violence, but its ritual imita-
tion necessarily includes mythic elements. The original violence certainly
did not bring into conflict two such neatly differentiated groups as those of
the two uncles. It can be stated as a principle that violence precedes either
the division of an original group into two exogamous moieties, or the
association of two groups of strangers, gathered together to effect matri-
monial exchanges. The original violence took place within a single, soli-
tary group, which the mechanism of the surrogate victim compelled
either to split in separate groups or to seek an association with other
groups. Ritual violence invariably takes place between already constituted
groups.

Ritual violence is always less internal than the original violence. In
assuming a mythico-ritual character, violence tends toward the exterior,
and this tendency in turn assumes certain sacrificial characteristics; it
conceals the site of the original violence, thereby shielding from this
violence, and from the very knowledge of this violence, the elementary
group whose very survival depends on the absolute triumph of peace. The
ritual violence that accompanies the exchange of women serves a sacri-
ficial purpose for each group. In sum, the groups agree never to be
completely at peace, so that their members may find it easier to be at
peace among themselves. We see here the principle behind all “foreign”
wars: aggressive tendencies that are potentially fatal to the cohesion of the
group are redirected from within the community to outside it. Inversely,
there is reason to believe that the wars described as “foreign wars” in the
mythic narratives were in fact formerly civil strifes. There are many tales
that tell of two warring cities or nations, in principle independent of one
another—Thebes and Argos, Rome and Alba, Hellas and Troy—whose
conflicts bring to the surface so many elements pertaining directly to the
sacrificial crisis and to its violent resolution that it is hard not to view these
stories as mythic elaborations of this same crisis, presented in terms of a
“fictive” foreign threat.

Notes

1 A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, “The Study of Kinship Systems,” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute 71 (1941):2.

2 Claude Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, trans. Claire Jacobson and
Brooke Grundfest (New York, 1963), 1-54.

3 Ibid., p. 50.

4 Ibid.

5 Ibid.

6 The French term bricolage, as employed here by Lévi-Strauss, has no English
equivalent. The best we can do is to refer to Lévi-Strauss’s own discussion of
the term in The Savage Mind (Chicago, 1966): “There still exists among our-
selves an activity which on the technical plane gives us quite a good under-
standing of what a science we prefer to call ‘prior’ rather than ‘primitive’,
could have been on the plane of speculation. This is what is commonly called
‘bricolage’ in French. In its old sense the verb ‘bricoler’ applied to ball games
and billiards, to hunting, shooting and riding. It was however always used
with reference to some extraneous movement: a ball rebounding, a dog stray-
ing or a horse swerving from its direct course to avoid an obstacle. And in our
own time the ‘bricoleur’ is still someone who works with his hands and uses
devious means compared with those of a craftsman. . . . It might be said that
the engineer questions the universe, while the ‘bricoleur’ addresses himself
to a collection of oddments left over from human endeavors, that is, only a
sub-set of the culture.’ ” (pp. 16-17, 19}.—Trans.

7 Ibid., p. 51.

8 Lévi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, p. 480.

9 Ibid., pp. 485, 481.

10 Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked, trans. John Weightman and
Doreen Weightman (New York, 1969), p. 51.

11 Ibid.

12 Ibid., p. 84.

13 Ibid., p. 85.

14 Ibid., p. 53.

15 Franz Boas, “Tsimshian Mythology,” Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology
31, 185, No. 25. See also Stith Thompson, ed., Tales of the North American
Indians (Bloomington, Ind., 1968), pp. 178-186.

16 Claude Lévi-Strauss, “La Geste d’Asdiwal,” Annuaire de l'école pratique des
hautes études 6 (1958-59).

17 Cf. Thompson, ed., Tales of the North American Indians (Bloomington, 1968),
p. 261 n. 3.

18 Boas, “Tsimshian Mythology.”


The Gods, the Dead, the Sacred, and Sacrificial Substitution


Every god, hero, and mythic creature so far encountered, from the sacred
African king to Chief Pestilence of the Tsimshians, embodies the interplay
of violence projected by an act of generative unanimity.

Oedipus, our first example, seemed at the outset of his career to incar-
nate an almost exclusively maleficent form of violence. It was only later,
in Oedipus at Colonus, that he assumed an actively beneficent role. As we
know, unanimous violence is generative of a religious order and the
man charged with the crime of patricide and incest is credited with the act
of generation. Thus Oedipus’s transformation into an object of public
reverence is not hard to understand.

The two Oedipus tragedies permit us to study in isolation two conflict-
ing and successive moments of the hero’s sacralization. In The Bacchae, as
we have observed, these same two moments serve to define the dual
personality of Dionysus, his beneficent and maleficent aspects. In the
Euripidean drama the moments are so telescoped and juxtaposed that it
would be almost impossible to recognize their point of origin or appreciate
their historical development if we did not have Sophocles’ Oedipus plays
to guide us. The religious formulation of the Oedipus myth is considerably
easier to grasp because it is less transmuted, more directly based on the
mechanism of the surrogate victim.

In The Bacchae Dionysus plays the role not of victim, but of executioner.
This difference, which may at first seem crucial, is in fact of no con-
sequence for the religious implications of the work. As we have already
remarked, the mythic or divine creature who appears as the incarnation of
violence is not restricted to the role of surrogate victim. The metamorphosis
of the maleficent into the beneficent is the major aspect of his mission, the
aspect that elicits public veneration; but he is equally capable of effecting
the reverse transformation. He can intervene at any stage and assume all
roles, either simultaneously or in succession. Thus, there are moments
in Dionysus’ career when he relinquishes the role of executioner to
assume that of victim of the diasparagmos. In one episode of his myth, for
instance, he is torn limb for limb by a raging mob of Titans: a mythic
creature (Zagreus or Dionysus) is sacrificed by other mythic creatures. The
burden of the story is identical to that of the origin myths referred to
earlier.

We have seen that in the course of the Incwala rites the King of
the Swazi becomes simultaneously executioner and victim. Similarly, the
Aztec god Xipe-Totec demonstrates the ability of the incarnation of the
sacred to assume different roles within the system. Sometimes this god is
killed and flayed in the person of a victim offered as substitute for him; at
other times the god becomes the executioner, flaying victims in order to
don their skin. Evidently religious thought perceives all those who parti-
cipate in this violent interplay, whether actively or passively, as doubles.
Xipe-Totec can be translated “our flayed lord and master’—a name that
suggests that the basic role remains that of surrogate victim.

The theory of a violence that is sometimes reciprocal, sometimes
unanimous and generative, is the first truly to take into account the
double nature of all primitive divinities, the blending of beneficent and
maleficent that characterizes all mythical figures who involve themselves
in mortal affairs. Dionysus is at one and the same time the “most terrible”
and the “most gentle” of the gods. There is a Zeus who hurls thunderbolts
and a Zeus “as sweet as honey.” In fact, there is no ancient divinity who
does not have a double face. If the Roman Janus turns to his worshippers
a countenance alternately warlike and peaceful, that is because he too
reflects the same alternation; and if he comes in time to symbolize foreign
war, that is because foreign war is merely another form of sacrificial
violence.

If we understand the interplay of violence in primitive societies, the
origins and structure of all mythical and supernatural beings becomes
clear. As we have seen, the surrogate victim meets his death in the guise of
the monstrous double. All sacred creatures partake of monstrosity,
whether overtly or covertly; this aspect of their nature can be traced to the
monstrous double. The marriage of beneficent and maleficent constitutes,
of course, the original and fundamental monstrosity, the superhuman
creature’s absorption of the difference between “good” and “bad”
difference, that basic difference that dominates all others.

There is no essential difference between the monstrous aspects of
Oedipus and the monstrous aspects of Dionysus. Dionysus is simul-
taneously god, man, and bull; Oedipus is simultaneously son, husband,
father, and brother of the same human beings. Both have incorporated
into themselves differences normally considered irreconcilable. Religious
thinking puts all differences at the same level; it assimilates family and
cultural differences to natural differences. When we are dealing with
mythology, therefore, we must make do without any clear distinction
between physical monstrosity and moral monstrosity. Religious thought
makes no distinction between biological twins and twins of violence
engendered by the disintegration of the cultural order.

All the episodes of the Oedipus myth are repetitions of one another.
Once we recognize this fact it becomes apparent that all the figures in the
various episodes are monsters and that their resemblance is far closer than
appearance alone might suggest. Oedipus, naturally, is a monster, but
Tiresias is a monster, too: as a hermaphrodite he incorporates the differ-
ence between the two sexes. The sphinx is a monster, a veritable con-
glomerate of differences, with its woman's head, lion’s body, serpent’s
tail, and eagle’s wings. On first glance there is a radical difference between
this imaginary creature and the human protagonists, but this difference
vanishes on closer inspection. The sphinx plays the same role in relation
to Oedipus as do all the human figures. The sphinx bars Oedipus’s way; it
becomes an object of fascination and a secret model; it is the bearer of the
logos phobou, the oracle of doom. Like Laius, like the drunken Corinthian
earlier in the story and Creon and Tiresias later, the sphinx dogs Oedipus’s
tracks—whenever, that is, Oedipus is not dogging the sphinx’s tracks. Like
the others, the sphinx catches Oedipus in an oracular trap; in short, the
episode of the sphinx recapitulates the other episodes. The sphinx appears
as the incarnation of maleficent violence, as Oedipus himself will appear
later on. The sphinx has been sent by Hera to punish Thebes, just as the
plague is visited upon the city by order of Apollo. Like the plague, the
sphinx’s appetite for victims increases steadily until it is vanquished
by Oedipus, who thereby restores the city. The episode of the sphinx
shows Oedipus in the role of monster-killer or executioner. Later, a mon-
ster himself, he will assume the role of surrogate victim. Like all incarna-
tions of sacred violence, Oedipus can and does play every part in
succession.

The sacred king is also a monster. He is simultaneously god, man, and
savage beast. Royal titles like “the Lion” or “the Leopard” may degenerate
into mere formulas, but they have their origin in memories of the mon-
strous double and generative unanimity. Moral and physical monstrosity
are thus blended and confused. Like Oedipus, the king is at once stranger
and son, the most intimate of insiders and the most bizarre of outsiders; he
is an exemplar of enormous tenderness and frightful savagery. As an
incestuous criminal, he stands above and beyond all the rules he promul-
gates and enforces. He is the wisest and the most lunatic, the blindest and
the most lucid of men. This monopolizing of differences, which makes of
the king a sacred monster in every possible sense of the term, finds vivid
expression in ritual chants:

The chieftain is neither this nor that.

The chieftain is neither good nor bad.

He is at once guest, foreigner, and host villager.
He is the wise man and the fool.!

It should be no cause for surprise, then, that the august inhabitants of
Olympus have been charged with a fair number of rapes, murders, parri-
cides, and incestuous acts, as well as innumerable incidents of savagery
and madness. Nor should we be surprised to discover that these divine
personages seem to be made up of bits and pieces taken from every
order of reality—human, animal, inorganic, cosmic. Nothing is more
futile than to seek stable distinctions among these monsters, unless it is
the attempt to derive psychological insights from their stories, insights
pertaining either to individuals or to the “collective consciousness.” Of
all learned pursuits undertaken in the course of Western history, that
one is surely the most foolhardy. The pseudorational treatment of
monsters, the classification of monster stories into “archetypes,” can
only serve as a humorless revision of Ovid’s subtle and exhaustive
Metamorphoses; it can only serve further to elaborate the mythological pro-
cess. To pontificate on the subject of monsters is in effect to take them
seriously, to enter into their game; it is to be duped by their appearance
instead of recognizing the human being who lurks behind the monstrous
form.

The variations among various types of mythological creatures only
become interesting if we relate these variations to their common origin in
generative violence. We then realize that the differences reside not in the
objects themselves but in the indeterminate nature of the hallucinated
indifferentiation they embody, an indifferentiation that is made
determinate retrospectively by the generative violence.

Some religious differences clearly reflect the violence that engendered
them: the ritual incest of the African monarchs, for instance, or such
sacrificial practices as the Dionysiac sparagmos. In many mythologies the
gods, spirits, or mythic creatures are divided into two distinct camps, one
of “serious” and one of “comic” personalities. The Greek Hermes and the
Roman Mercury are examples of comic gods. Some societies harbor sacred
clowns or fools. The North Americans have their “tricksters”; there are
royal fools, and kings of fools, and any number of temporary sovereigns,
both comic and tragic, who are ceremonially sacrificed at the predeter-
mined end of their brief reign. These figures are incarnations of sacred
violence as surely as the African king, but on a somewhat different level.
In each case we are dealing with collective violence, and more specifically
with a certain mode of collective violence. In addition to the “serious”
expulsion, there must always have been an act of expulsion based at least
in part on ridicule. In the modern world our everyday, much diluted
forms of social ostracism are generally based on ridicule; much of con-
temporary literature is explicitly or implicitly concerned with this pheno-
menon. We need only think of those social categories and individuals
that provide the victims in scapegoat rites—vagabonds, beggars, crip-
ples—to recognize that derision of one form or another plays a large part
in the negative feelings that find expression in the course of the ritual
sacrifice and that are finally purified and purged by it.

We have here a body of material that calls out for detailed analysis. But
because the relevance of this material to my general thesis presents, at
least in principle, no real problem, let us pass on to other forms of religion
and consider how they can fit my scheme. Let us turn first to a religious
practice that may appear very different from those previously examined
but one that is in actuality closely related: ancestor worship or, more
simply, the worship of the dead.

In certain cultures the gods are either absent or insignificant. In such
cases mythic ancestors, or the dead, take the place of the missing divinities
and are seen as the founders, guardians and, if need be, disrupters of the
cultural order. When incest, adultery, and other social ills begin to pro-
liferate, when family relationships begin to crumble, the dead are dis-
pleased and visit their displeasure on the living. They bring nightmares,
madness, contagious diseases; they provoke discord among relatives and
neighbors and instigate all sorts of perversions.

The crisis assumes the form of a loss of difference between the living
and the dead, a casting down ofall barriers between two normally separate
realms. We have here the proof that the dead incarnate violence; exterior
and transcendent violence when order reigns, immanent violence when
things turn bad and maleficent reciprocity walks abroad. The dead do not
want the total destruction of an order that is after all basically their own.
After they have brought about a paroxysm of sorts in the community they
are willing once more to accept the homage of their descendants; they
cease to haunt the living and withdraw to their usual retreats. If they do
not go into exile of their own accord, they allow themselves to be led into
exile by the community’s ritual observances. The difference between the
living and the dead is thereby restored.

This troubling confusion between living and dead is sometimes
regarded as the consequence of the crisis and sometimes as its cause. The
punishments that the dead inflict upon the living are indistinguishable
from the consequences of wrongdoing. In a small community hubris
spreads rapidly, with, as we know, dire results. Thus the vengeance of the
dead, like the vengeance of the gods, is both real and implacable. It is, in
fact, violence’s own revenge on those who wield it.

In this instance the dead have clearly replaced the gods, and the beliefs
relating to the dead lead us back to our discussion of Oedipus, Dionysus,
and the rest. Yet a question remains: How can the dead incarnate violence
as authoritatively as do the gods?

Death is the ultimate violence that can be inflicted on a living being. It is
therefore the extreme of maleficence. With death a contagious sort of
violence is let loose on the community, and the living must take steps to
protect themselves against it. So they quarantine death, creating a cordon
sanitaire all around it. Above all, they have recourse to funeral rites, which
(like all other rites) are dedicated to the purgation and expulsion of
maleficent violence.

Whatever the cause and circumstances of his death, the dying man
finds himself in a situation similar to that of the surrogate victim vis-a-vis
the community. The grief of the moumer is a curious mixture of terror
and hope—a mixture conducive to resolutions of good conduct in the
future. The death of the individual has something of the quality of a
tribute levied for the continued existence of the collectivity. A human
being dies, and the solidarity of the survivors is enhanced by his death.

The surrogate victim dies so that the entire community, threatened by
the same fate, can be reborn in a new or renewed cultural order. Having
sown the seeds of death, the god, ancestor, or mythic hero then dies
himself or selects a victim to die in his stead. In so doing he bestows a new
life on men. Understanding this process, we can also understand why
death should be regarded as the elder sister, not to say the mother and
ultimate source, of life itself.

Belief in a union between life and death has long been ascribed to the
cycle of the seasons, the annual rebirths and deaths in the plant kingdom.
Such a theory simply involves heaping one myth on top of another; it
refuses to acknowledge the violence that permeates all human relation-
ships. The theme of death and resurrection flourishes in regions where
seasonal change is nonexistent or very slight. And even where analogies
do exist or when the religious imagination has put them to use, we are not
justified in regarding nature as the source of this belief. The periodicity of
the seasons serves as a rhythmic accompaniment to the changes
that occur in human relationships and have as their pivot the death of a
sacrificial victim.

Death, then, contains the germ of life. There is no life on the communal
level that does not originate in death. Death can appear as the true god-
head, the confluence of the most beneficent and most maleficent forms of
violence. This may well have been what Heraclitus meant when he
declared: “Dionysus and Hades are the same.” Surely he is not merely
making reference to Dionysus’ anecdotal link to the Underworld, but
rather is directing attention to death, community harmony, and the genesis
of the gods.

A duality of “good” and “bad” may be found even in the material
aspects of death. As long as the process of decomposition takes its course,
the cadaver is an impure element. Like the violent disintegration of a
society, the physiological decomposition of the corpse leads gradually
from a very complex system of differentials to undifferentiated dust. The
forms of the living revert to formlessness. And language itself falters in
describing the “remains.” The rotting corpse becomes, in the words of
Bossuet, “cet objet qui n’a de nom dans aucune langue.”

However, once the process has been completed and the terrible dyna-
mism of decomposition is over, the impure status of the “nameless object”
is generally terminated as well. In certain socicties the dry and whitened
bones of the deceased are thought to possess beneficial properties, to be
conducive to fertility.”

Every death tends to become ritualized after the model of the genera-
tive expulsion, to make allusion to the underlying mystery of violence. In
return, the generative expulsion may be memorialized in the form of
death. This is precisely what takes place when the dead exercise functions
that are elsewhere the prerogative of the gods. All aspects of violence are
assimilated to an individual ancestor or to the entire legion of the dead.
The monstrous character of the original ancestor, the fact that he is fre-
quently the incarnation of an animal, can be seen as proof that the “mon-
strous double” still holds sway at the origin of the cult. The worship of the
dead, like the worship of the gods, represents an interpretation of the role
of violence in the destiny of a community. In fact, it is the most transpar-
ent of all such interpretations, the closest to what actually occurred the first
time—except, of course, that it has misconstrued, as always, the mechan-
ism of recovered unanimity. This interpretation states explicitly that the
origin of any cultural order involves a human death and that the decisive
death is that of a member of the community.

I began by tracing the course of violence through those beings who
appear to incarnate it: mythic heroes, sacred kings, gods, and deified
ancestors. Those various incarnations enrich our understanding of the
many roles of violence and clarify the function of the surrogate victim and
the preeminent importance of violent unanimity.

These incarnations are invariably illusory in one sense. Violence
belongs to all men, and thus to none in particular. All the actors have the
same role, with the exception of the surrogate victim. But anybody can
play the part of surrogate victim. It is futile to look for the secret of the
redemptive process in distinctions between the surrogate victim and
the other members of the community. The crucial fact is that the choice of
the victim is arbitrary. The religious interpretations we have considered so
far are at fault precisely because they attribute the beneficial results of the
sacrifice to the superhuman nature of the victim or of the other partici-
pants, insofar as any of these appears to incarnate the supreme violence.

In addition to such “personalized” interpretations, there is an impersonal
approach. It corresponds to the full range of the term sacred, or rather, of
the Latin sacer, which is sometimes translated “sacred,” sometimes
“accursed,” for it encompasses the maleficent as well as the beneficent.
Analogous words can be found in many languages; the famous mana of
the Melanesians, for example, or the wakan of the Sioux and the orenda of
the Iroquois.

In one respect at least the structure of the sacer is the least deceptive,
the least mythic of all; it postulates no single master of ceremonies, no
intervention by a privileged party, even a superhuman one. The fact that
the sacer can be understood in terms that require no anthropomorphic
presence demonstrates that religion should not be defined as animism or
anthropomorphism. If religion consisted of “humanizing” the nonhuman
or bestowing “souls” wherever they were felt to be lacking, an impersonal
apprehension of the sacred would not be possible.

My effort to group all the subjects considered in this study under a
general heading has resulted in the title Violence and the Sacred. This
impersonal designation is fundamental to our discussion. In Africa, as in
many other parts of the world, there is only a single term to denote the
two faces of the sacred—the interplay of order and disorder, of differ-
ence lost and retrieved, as enacted in the immutable drama of the sacri-
fice of the incestuous king. This term serves to describe all the royal
transgressions, all forbidden as well as all permitted sexual practices, all
forms of violence and brutality; unclean things, decaying matter, mon-
strosities, disputes between relatives and neighbors, outbursts of spite,
envy, and jealousy. In addition, the same term embraces the creative
impulse and the urge for order, for peace, calm, and stability. All these
varied significations appear under the aegis of royalty. Royalty is an
incarnation of the sacred. But these same manifestations of the sacred
can also exist apart from royalty; we must have recourse to the sacred
in order to understand the institution of royalty, but the reverse does
not hold true.

Sacrifice too can be defined solely in terms of the sacred, without refer-
ence to any particular divinity; that is, it can be defined in terms of malefi-
cent violence polarized by the victim and metamorphosed by his death (or
expulsion from the community, which amounts to the same thing) into
beneficent violence. Although the sacred is “bad” when it is inside the
community, it is “good” when it returns to the exterior. The language of
pure sacredness retains whatever is most fundamental to myth and
religion; it detaches violence from man to make it a separate, impersonal
entity, a sort of fluid substance that flows everywhere and impregnates on
contact. The concept of contagion is obviously a by-product of this way of
envisaging the sacred. As a concept contagion makes empirical sense in
many cases, but it is mythic insofar as it ignores the reciprocal aspect of
violence; it literally reifies the violence that is active in human relation-
ships by transforming it into a pseudo-substance. Though generally less
mythic than the language of divinity, the language of pure sacredness is
more mythic in that it eliminates the final traces of the real victims,
thereby concealing the fact that the sacred cannot function without
surrogate victims.

I have used the phrase “violence and the sacred”; I might as well have
said “violence or the sacred.” For the operations of violence and the
sacred are ultimately the same process. Although ethnologists are gener-
ally disposed to acknowledge that violence exists at the heart of the
sacred, they also hasten to add that the sacred includes another, more
important and directly contradictory element. The sacred, as they see it,
involves order as well as disorder, peace as well as war, creation as well as
destruction. In fact, the sacred seems so heterogeneous that the specialists
have despaired of ever sorting it out. Yet the theory of generative violence
permits us to define the sacred in simple, concrete terms that emphasize
its underlying unity without overlooking its complexity; it enables us to
bring together all the disparate elements of the sacred into an intelligible
whole.

Once we have recognized the role of generative violence, it becomes
clear why the sacred is able to include within itself so many opposites.
Sometimes it rallies the whole community around itself in order to save
mankind and restore culture, sometimes it seems intent on destroying its
own creations. Men do not worship violence as such. Primitive religion is
no “cult of violence” in the contemporary sense of the phrase. Violence is
venerated insofar as it offers men what little peace they can ever expect.
Nonviolence appears as the gratuitous gift of violence; and there is some
truth in this equation, for men are only capable of reconciling their differ-
ences at the expense of a third party. The best men can hope for in their
quest for nonviolence is the unanimity-minus-one of the surrogate
victim.

If primitive religious thought is mistaken in deifying violence, it is cor-
rect in its refusal to attribute to mankind the principle of social unity. To
date, Western society has escaped the most catastrophic form of basic
violence, the violence that is capable of annihilating society. This privil-
ege, however, has not been obtained through the kind of dépassement
advanced by the idealist philosophers, who cannot conceive either of the
nature of this privilege or the reason behind it, and indeed hardly realize
their good fortune. That is why modern philosophers attribute the origin
of society to a “social contract,” either implicit or explicit, rooted in “rea-
son,” “good sense,” “mutual self-interest,” and so forth. They are incap-
able of grasping the essence of religion and attributing to it a real function.
This incapacity is mythic in character, since it perpetuates the religion’s
own misapprehensions in regard to violence. It evades the problem of
human violence and mistakes the nature of the threat this violence poses
for human society.

Even the crudest of religious viewpoints acknowledges a truth ignored
by even the most lucid nonreligious system. The religious believer knows
that the establishment of a human society is no simple matter and that the
credit for its accomplishment cannot go to man. The relationship between
modern thought and primitive religion is somewhat different from what it
appears at first glance. Although modern and primitive man share a funda-
mental misunderstanding of the nature of violence, primitive man retains
certain insights into this nature, insights that are perfectly real and that
wholly escape our grasp.

Religion instructs men as to what they must and must not do to prevent
a recurrence of destructive violence. When they neglect rites and violate
prohibitions they call down upon themselves transcendent violence,
which assumes the role of the demonic temptor—an illusion for which
men will continue to fight, spiritually as well as physically, to the point of
total annihilation. The surrogate victim alone can save them; almighty
violence may judge the “guilty” parties to have been sufficiently “pun-
ished” and may condescend to become its transcendence once more, to
withdraw far enough away to observe mankind from the exterior of the
community, yet not so far away that it ceases to inspire the dreadful awe
that is essential to man’s salvation.

We, the spoiled children of privilege, consider the god’s anger as some-
thing illusory. In fact it is a terrible reality. Its justice is implacable, its
impartiality truly divine. Anger shows no distinctions in its dealings with
men; it is at one with reciprocity, with the irresistible tendency of violence
to turn against the unfortunate beings who have sought to shape it
exclusively to their own uses.

Because of their large-scale and sophisticated organization, modern
Wester societies have appeared largely immune to violence’s law of retri-
bution. In consequence, modern thinkers assume that this law is, and has
always been, mere illusion and that those modes of thinking that treat it
as real are sheer fantasies. To be sure, these modes of thinking must be
considered mythic insofar as they attribute the enforcement of the law to
an authority extrinsic to man. But the law of retribution itself is very real;
it has its origins in the reality of human relationships. If we are still
strangers to this law it is not because we have managed to transcend it,
but because its application to the modern world has been indefinitely
postponed, for reasons unknown to us. That, perhaps, is what
contemporary history is making clear.

Each of the phenomena discussed in this study can be explained by the
identity of violence and the sacred. This identity explains the dual influ-
ence for good and evil of blood in general and menstrual blood in particular;
it also explains the structure of Greek tragedy and Freud’s Totem and
Taboo. The union of the sacred with violence may seem fanciful or incredible;
it may jar our habitual way of thinking. But the more we look about
us the more intelligible this union appears.

To the examples previously adduced I should like to add one that seems
particularly appropriate at this stage of the discussion. It can be phrased as
a question: Why is the production of metal, particularly in Africa, accom-
panied by strict regulations, and the metal workers themselves endowed
with sacred qualities? The application of my general theory should yield a
ready answer to this small enigma, which forms part of the larger enigma
of the sacred.

Metal is the source of inestimable benefits. It facilitates domestic tasks
and helps the community defend itself against outside enemies. But these
advantages are not without a reverse side; all weapons, after all, are
double-edged. The existence of metal increases the danger that would
result from an internal conflict; its potentiality for good is balanced by its
potentiality for evil. The dual tendency of human relations—toward
discord and conflict as well as toward cohesion and harmony—is
complemented by the nature of metals.

For better or for worse, the metal worker is the master of a potent form
of violence. That is why he is “sacred” in the dual sense of the word. He
enjoys certain privileges but is considered a slightly sinister figure. He is
someone to be avoided; and his forge is relegated to the outskirts of the
community.

Some modern discussion of this phenomenon conveys the impression,
at least implicitly, that the prestige of the metal worker arises from the
natives’ vague sense that he is somehow infringing on domains reserved
for “superior civilizations”—especially the most superior civilization of all,
our very own. In this interpretation it is not the dangers inherent in the
production of metal, or the uses to which men put metal, that inspire fear,
but rather the fact that metalworking is the prerogative of the white man.
In short, the cult of the metal worker would be related directly or
indirectly to a single real object— ourselves. Such a theory bears witness
to the monumental fatuousness of a technological culture that has been
so dulled by its long and mysterious immunity from attack that it no
longer has any consciousness of hubris, or even a word to describe that
concept.

Men who have mastered the techniques of metalworking have no rea-
son to regard the process with fear since, after all, they themselves have
mastered it. The sacredness of the forge does not emanate from us; we
have no monopoly on the technique and exert no influence, Promethean
or otherwise, on its practitioners. The specters of nuclear warfare and
industrial pollution that menace our own society constitute only one illus-
tration—admittedly a dramatic one—of a law that primitive people regard
as real even if they do not entirely understand it but that we dismiss as
fictitious: whoever uses violence will in turn be used by it.

The community that sponsors a forge on its outer boundaries is not very
different from our own. As long as some profit can be derived from them,
the metal workers, or magicians, are left in peace. But as soon as the
community becomes aware of some backlash of violence it will shift
the responsibility to those who led the community into temptation, the
manipulators of sacred violence. They will be accused of having betrayed
a community to which they only half belong, of having used against this
community a power that had always been mistrusted. The village may be
visited by a calamity that has nothing to do with metal or metal produc-
tion; nevertheless, the metal worker’s life will be in jeopardy. In time of
trouble he is the one who takes all the blame.

As soon as the sacred—that is, violence—has found its way to the
interior of the community, the motif of the surrogate victim will start to
emerge. The position of the metal worker, even in time of peace, reveals
his connection not only to the magician but also to the sacred king. In
certain societies the metal worker, without ceasing to be a kind of pariah,
assumes the role of supreme arbiter. In the event of an irresolvable struggle
he is called upon to “differentiate” the irreconcilable antagonists, thus
proving that he incarnates the sacred violence that is sometimes malefi-
cent, sometimes beneficent. If the metal worker or magician should hap-
pen to die at the hands of the community, and the community’s hysteria
be thereby appeased, the intimate connection between the victim and the
sacred seems confirmed. Like all systems of thought founded on sacrifice,
the reasoning that endows the metal worker with sacred qualities forms a
virtually closed system; it can never be refuted.

The violent death of a metal worker, a sorcerer, a magician, and in
general of anybody who seems to share a particular affinity with the
sacred, might be seen as a half-way point between spontaneous collective
violence and ritual sacrifice. There is a perfect continuity from one to the
other. To grasp the nature of this ambiguity is to move closer to an under-
standing of generative violence and ritual sacrifice, and the relationship
between these two phenomena.

The failure of modern man to grasp the nature of religion has served to
perpetuate its effects. Our lack of belief serves the same function in our
society that religion serves in societies more directly exposed to essential
violence. We persist in disregarding the power of violence in human soci-
eties; that is why we are reluctant to admit that violence and the sacred
are one and the same thing. It is important to insist on this identity; and
the field of lexicography provides ample supporting evidence.

Many languages, most notably Greek, contain terms that reveal the
nondifference between violence and the sacred. And it is easily demon-
strable that cultural evolution in general, and lexicographers in particular,
have a tendency to put asunder that which primitive language has joined;
that it, to suppress the scandalous conjunction of violence and the sacred.

We will take our examples from a work of great stature whose very
mistakes carry weight: Emile Benveniste’s Le Vocabulaire des institutions
indo-européennes. The use of the term Heros to qualify instruments of vio-
lence and warfare is so regular that scholars sometimes translate the word
as “strong,” “active,” “excited,” etc. The Greek hieros is related to the Vedic
isirah, which is generally translated as “vital force.” This is itself a com-
promise that conceals the conjunction of the most maleficent and most
beneficent forces in the nucleus of the term. It is the sort of compromise
that modern scholars frequently resort to when defining terms that have
to do with the sacred.

Benveniste asserts that Hieros has nothing to do with violence and
should always be translated as “sacred.” He makes no mention of the fact
that even in French the word sacré retains an ambiguous sense, perhaps
inherited from the Latin sacer. To the linguist, the fact that Hieros is fre-
quently associated with terms implying violence is of no importance. The
use of this term seems to him justified not by the word it directly modifies
but by the appearance in the text of some god or some specifically
religious motif he regards as wholly foreign to the idea of violence.

In order to eliminate from words relating to the sacred a duality he
finds both dubious and inconvenient, Benveniste has recourse to two
procedures. The first, as we have just seen, is to suppress altogether
whichever of the two meanings has been most weakened in the course of
the historical evolution of the word. In those rare cases where historical
evolution has had no effect on the word’s duality, or where two opposite
meanings both carry equal weight, Benveniste unhesitatingly affirms that
we are really dealing with two different terms, accidentally grouped
together under the same signifier. This second procedure is illustrated by
Benveniste’s treatment of kratos and its derived adjective krateros. Kratos is
generally translated as “divine force.” Krateros is sometimes used of a god,
in which case it is translated as “divinely strong,” “supernaturally power-
ful,” and so forth. At other times it qualifies things that seem so foreign to
our notion of the gods that the lexicographer flatly refuses the Greeks
permission to consider them divine:

When from kratos we turn to krateros we expect the adjective to convey the
same sense as the substantive. Kratos always denotes a quality pertaining to
heroes, warriors and leaders; it is reasonable to assume that the adjective
krateros has a eulogistic connotation, and such is indeed the case. However, this
makes it all the more surprising to encounter krateros being used to describe
qualities which are very far from praiseworthy and which incur blame or
reproach. When Hecuba, Priam’s wife, calls the Achilles who has just killed her
son Hector an aner krateros (Hiad XXIV. 212) she clearly intends no compliment
on his martial virtue. Paul Mazon translates the phrase as “brutal hero.” And to
appreciate the application of the adjective to Ares (II. 515) we must consider it
in the context of some of the god’s other epithets: miaiphonos (homicide),
androphones (killer of men), brotoloigos (fatal to mortals), aidelos (destroyer) . . .
none of which present him in a favorable light.

The discrepancy goes even deeper. Whereas Kratos applies exclusively to gods
and men, krateros can refer to animals and objects, and its sense in those cases is
always “hard, cruel, violent...”

In Hesiod, who uses some of the same vocabulary, we find the two meanings
we have ascribed to the Homeric krateros: favorable when it accompanies the
word amumon, “without reproach” (Theog. 1013), unfavorable when it
describes Ares the killer of men (Scutum 92, 101) or a dragon (Theog. 328), or
the Erinyes...?

The basis for the semantic partitioning of the word is its “eulogistic
connotation,” the fact that it sheds favorable light, the fact of its beneficence.
Benveniste does not entertain the notion of a union of the beneficent and
maleficent within the context of sacred violence. Krateros can apply
equally to a savage beast tearing apart its prey and to the iron blade of a
sword; to the hardness of a breastplate, to terrible illnesses, to the most
barbarous acts, to strife, and to vehement conflicts. Were we to quote
every example offered by Benveniste, virtually all the elements of the
sacrificial crisis would pass in parade before our eyes. Thus we are dealing
with a term that admirably displays the conjunction of good and bad
violence within the sacred. Because the two meanings of the word are too
widely distributed for either of them to be suppressed, Benveniste con-
cludes that the lexicographical grouping around krafos reveals “a very
unusual semantic situation.” This grouping, he asserts, is a unity in
appearance only; in reality the two conflicting meanings should be
attached to “two Indo-European roots of distinctly different origins,
though related if not actually similar in form.”*

The sole basis for this theory is a refusal to admit the union of violence
and the divine that is made manifest by the various usages of krateros. The
good krateres of gods and heroes is the same as the bad krateros of mon-
sters, plagues, and savage beasts. An example cited by Benveniste him-
self—Ares krateros—shows the futility of his division. Here, Benveniste
asserts, is an instance of the bad krateros. That may be, but Ares is no less
divine for being cruel and brutal. And Ares is the god of war. It may be
that the deification of war is a far more significant matter than the bombastic
odes dedicated to the military glory of an Augustus or a Louis XIV might suggest.

In the rationalist’s dictionary the sacred is defined either as a concept
that is still lacking in specificity or as a fully developed concept that has
become confused with other concepts. The lexicographer takes it upon
himself to make a clean sweep of all “ambiguities,” “confusions,” and
“uncertainties” and to replace them with a perfectly coherent set of signi-
fications. In fact, this tendency is not confined to lexicography alone. As
we have seen, religious interpretations of the sacrificial crisis have always
been inclined to categorize its accompanying phenomena as either “good”
or “bad.” The farther one progresses, the more pronounced becomes the
tendency to make separate and distinct entities of the two aspects of the
sacred. In Latin, for example, sacer has retained its original double connotation,
but the need to isolate the beneficent aspects of the word has
resulted in an offshoot, sanctus. So it is that modern lexicography is caught
up in the continuing mythological evolution that is little by little effacing
the last signs of the generative experience and making the true role of
violence ever more difficult to ascertain.

Some, however, have resisted this impulse. Here, for example, is Henri
Jeanmaire’s remarkable commentary on the word thysias, which signifies
a priestess of Bacchus or one of the bacchantes. The word is derived from
the verb thyiein, which we discussed earlier on in connection with another
derivative, thymos: The probable etymology of the word suggests that it is connected
to a verb whose sense remains somewhat ambiguous; it signifies to make a sacrifice, on
the one hand, and on the other to hurl oneself impetuously or to whirl around
like something caught up in a tempest, or to swirl about like the waters of a
river or sea, or bubble up like spilled blood, like anger, like mad rage. There is
no need to split these two sets of usages, as is sometimes done today; no need
to divide them into two signifiers with different roots, especially if we are
willing to agree that this tempestuous whirling motion corresponds to one of
the methods by which a bacchante attains her characteristic state of trance, and
that a sacrifice, a sparagmos or otherwise, is the normal accompaniment of this
sort of state; or even that certain archaic forms of sacrifice provided the occa-
sion for ecstatic exercises. In addition, some modern observers have remarked
that the death throes of the sacrificial victim and the convulsive gestures of the
possessed person are both seen as manifestations of divine intervention, and
that the analogy between them is appreciated and explicitly expressed.”

The formal identification of violence with the sacred, as brought about
by the mechanism of the surrogate victim, will now permit us to complete
that theory of sacrifice whose basic tenets were set forth in the earlier
chapters of this study. I have already rejected the traditional interpre-
tation of sacrifice as an offering made to the gods, often in the form of food,
that provides “nourishment” for the transcendent being. This traditional
interpretation is certainly mythic, but should not for that reason be
regarded as simply imaginary. It is worth noting that religious discourse is
closer to the truth on this point than all the theories that modern scholars
have sought to put in its place.

Polarized by the sacrificial killing, violence is appeased. It subsides. We
might say that it is expelled from the community and becomes part of the
divine substance, from which it is completely indistinguishable, for each
successive sacrifice evokes in diminishing degree the immense calm pro-
duced by the act of generative unanimity, by the initial appearance of the
god. Just as the human body is a machine for transforming food into flesh
and blood, generative unanimity is a process for changing bad violence
into stability and fecundity. On the other hand, by the very fact of its
occurrence, this unanimity has set up a mechanism that will repeat its
operation indefinitely in the attenuated form of ritual sacrifice. If the god
is nothing more nor less than the massive violence that was expelled by
the original act of generative unanimity, then ritual sacrifice can indeed
be said to offer him portions of his own substance. Every time the sacrifice
accompanies its desired effect, and bad violence is converted into good
stability, the god is said to have accepted the offering of violence and
consumed it. It is not surprising, then, that all theological systems place
sacrificial operations under the jurisdiction of the divinity. Successful sacri-
fice prevents violence from reverting to a state of immanence and reci-
procity; that is, it reinforces the status of violence as an exterior influence,
transcendent and beneficent. Sacrifice accords the god all that he needs to
assure his continued growth and vigor. And it is the god himself who
“digests” the bad immanence, transforming it into good transcendence,
that is, into his own substance. The alimentary metaphor is confirmed by
the fact that in most cases the sacrificial victim is an animal that man uses
for food. Behind this metaphor it is easy to discern violence at work and to
catch a glimpse of its metamorphoses. Although religious explanations of
sacrifice are wholly false from the viewpoint of strict scientific truth, they
are perfectly true from the only viewpoint of any interest to religion—that
of protecting human beings from violence. For if we neglect to feed the
god, he will waste away; or else, maddened by hunger, he will descend
among men and lay claim to his nourishment with unexampled cruelty
and ferocity.

The surrogate victim is generally destroyed, and always expelled from
the community. As the violence subsides it is thought to have departed
with the victim, to have somehow been projected outside the community.
The community itself is felt to be free of infection—so long, that is, as the
cultural order within it is respected.

Once the outer limits of the community have been crossed we enter the
domain of savage sacredness, which recognizes neither boundaries nor
limits. This is the realm not only of gods and supernatural creatures, of
monsters and the dead, but also of nature itself (insofar as it remains
untouched by culture), of the cosmos and of all the rest of humanity.

We are wont to say that primitive peoples are imbued with the sacred.
The truth is that these peoples assume, just as we ourselves do, that they
have freed themselves, up to a point, from subjection to the sacred. They
alone adhere to the rules, promulgated by the sacred itself, that allow
them to maintain a precarious independence from divine intervention.
Foreigners are considered something less and more than human because
they fail to follow these rules. They may appear very maleficent or very
beneficent, but in either case they are deeply imbued with the sacred.

Each community sees itself as a lonely vessel adrift in a fast ocean
whose seas are sometimes calm and friendly, sometimes rough and
menacing. The first requirement for staying afloat is to obey the rules of
navigation dictated by the ocean itself. But the most diligent attention to
these rules is no guarantee of permanent safety. The ship is far from
watertight; ceaselessly, insidiously, it takes in water. Only a constant
repetition of rites seems to keep it from sinking.

If it is true that the community has everything to fear from the sacred, it
is equally true that the community owes its every existence to the sacred.
For in perceiving itself as uniquely situated outside the sphere of the
sacred, the community assumes that it has been engendered by it; the act
of generative violence that created the community is attributed not to
men, but to the sacred itself. Having brought the community into exis-
tence, the sacred brings about its own expulsion and withdraws from the
scene, thereby releasing the community from its direct contact.

The more men reflect on the apparent supremacy of the sacred, on the
vast disproportion between it and the community, the clearer it becomes
that the initiative in all domains, on all levels, belongs to the sacred. The
birth of the community is first and foremost an act of separation. That is
why metaphors of severance permeate the generative act. For instance,
the royal rites of the Incwala involve a cutting, biting, and slicing of the
New Year. In other words, the new temporal cycle is inaugurated by a
break with the sacred, which is invariably “bad” when it has infiltrated the
community. Whether we refer to catharsis or purification, purgation or
exorcism, it is actually the idea of evacuation and separation that is fore-
most. Modern thinkers view the sacred solely as a mediating force,
because they try to interpret primitive reality in terms of a religion that
has been purged of its maleficent qualities. But as we have seen, any
mingling of the community and the sacred, whether due to the interven-
tion of gods, mythic heroes, or the dead, produces exclusively maleficent
results. Every supernatural visitation is prompted by the spirit of revenge.
Benefits accrue only after the divinity has departed.

This is not to say that the mediative element has been eliminated. A
total separation of the community and the sacred would be fully as dan-
gerous as a fusion of the two. Too great a separation can result in a massive
onslaught of the sacred, a fatal backlash; then, too, there is always the risk
that men will neglect or even forget how to implement the preventive
measures taught them by the sacred itself as a defense against its own
violence. Human existence thus remains under the constant tutelage of
the sacred and is observed, regulated, and promoted by it.

The outcome of this relationship is as follows: although men cannot live
in the midst of violence, neither can they survive very long by ignoring its
existence or by deluding themselves into the belief that violence, despite
the ritual prohibitions attendant on it, can somehow be put to work as the
mere tool or servant of mankind. The complex and delicate nature of
the community’s dealings with the sacred, the ceaseless effort to arrive at
the ordered and uninterrupted accord essential to the well-being of the
community, can only be expressed, for want of the naked truth, in terms
of optimum distance. If the community comes too near the sacred it risks
being devoured by it; if, on the other hand, the community drifts too far
away, out of range of the sacred’s therapeutic threats and warnings, the
effects of its fecund presence are lost.

This spatial interpretation is clearly seen in societies in which the sacred
assumes the form of a special personage—the African sacred king, for
example. The presence in the midst of the community of a figure deeply
imbued with the sacred poses extraordinary problems. In certain cases the
king is forbidden to touch the ground for fear of contaminating it and
thereby causing the death of his subjects. Sometimes, too, the king is
forbidden to feed himself; the simple fact of his having touched food
makes it unsuitable fare for ordinary mortals. And there are cultures
where the sacred monster is carefully hidden from view, not for his own
protection but for that of his subjects, who would be struck dead by a
single glance from him.

Such precautions are designed to prevent direct contact. They do not
mean to imply that it is bad to shelter such an extraordinary being; quite
the contrary. As we have seen, the king is both very “bad” and extremely
“good”; the historical alternation of violence and peace is transferred from
time to space. The results have a faint analogy to modern theories of the
transformation of energy—perhaps because religious thought habitually
draws its models from nature.

The king’s subjects may feel ill at ease in his presence, awed by his sheer
superabundance of power, his silwane. Nevertheless, they would be terri-
fied if they were deprived of his presence. Our “timidity” and “respect” are
diluted forms of these same phenomena. There is an optimum distance
from which to confront a divine incarnation; it permits the reception of
beneficent effects without giving access to maleficent ones. The absolute
can be likened to fire: too near and one gets burned, too far away and one
gets nothing. Between these two extremes is a zone where one is warmed
and heartened by the welcome light.

All sacrificial rites are based on two substitutions. The first is provided
by generative violence, which substitutes a single victim for all the
members of the community. The second, the only strictly ritualistic substi-
tution, is that of a victim for the surrogate victim. As we know, it is essen-
tial that the victim be drawn from outside the community. The surrogate
victim, by contrast, is a member of the community. Ritual sacrifice is
defined as an inexact imitation of the generative act. Why, we may ask,
does sacrifice systematically exclude those who seem the most appropri-
ate victims, who bear the closest resemblance to the original: the members
of the community?

The need for some distinction between the original victim and the ritual
victims can readily be explained. If the sacrificial victim belonged to the
community (as does the surrogate victim), then his death would promote
further violence instead of dispelling it. Far from reiterating the effects of
generative violence, the sacrifice would inaugurate a new crisis. But
because certain conditions must be met, an organization capable of meet-
ing them does not inevitably have to come into being. If we think it does,
we succumb to the functionalist illusion. The second sacrificial substitution
still poses a problem that must be resolved.

We may wonder if the difference between the original and the copy,
between the primordial and the ritual victim, does not have its basis in
human reason. A kind of basic good sense would effect the shift from
within to without the community. The functional discrepancy between
the two types of victim could easily be taken for the “humane” (in the
sense of modern humanism) aspect of the sacrifice. What was referred to
earlier as sacrificial trickery would in fact be the sacrificers’ trickery; they
would choose to overlook some of the demands of ritual mimesis. And
their casual atittude toward the god’s command would stem from an atti-
tude they share with us moderns: deep within themselves, they would
sense the futility of these, and indeed of all, rites.

It is tempting to suppose that the second sacrificial substitution shows
that fanaticism has already given way to a primitive skepticism that fore-
shadows our own. Unfortunately, this theory will not stand up. First of all,
there are many societies in which the victims are human beings: prisoners
of war, slaves, children, even (in the case of the sacred king and related


sacrifices) members of the community. In these instances there seems to
be no second, sacrificial substitution. This is why the connection between
the original violence that had the surrogate victim for object and the ritual
imitations that succeeded it is particularly striking in the case of the sacred
king. In Chapter 4, when I was attempting to clarify the relationship
between the surrogate victim and the rite, the sacred king served as a
convenient example of the proximity of the original victim to the ritual
victim.

This is not to say that the second sacrificial substitution has been
entirely omitted in the case of the sacred king. While an exact repetition of
the generative violence is impossible, the very fact that the future victim
has been drawn from the community and is designated to replace the
surrogate victim sets him apart from the other members of the com-
munity and makes normal relations between himself and these other
members impossible. He now belongs to a category that can contain only
one member at a time, but it is one that nevertheless qualifies as “sacri-
ficeable” to almost the same degree as the categories of cattle and sheep in
other societies.

If the sole fact of being selected as a future victim is sufficient to meta-
morphose the chosen object, to make a sacred personage out of him, then
it is not hard to uncover the reasoning behind the different choices of
original victim and ritual victims. When a victim has been killed he
belongs to the sacred; it is the sacred itself that permits its own expulsion
or is expelled in the victim’s person. The surrogate victim thus appears as a
monster. He is no longer regarded in the same way as the other members
of the community.

If the sacrificeable categories are generally made up of creatures who do
not and have never belonged to the community, that is because the surro-
gate victim belongs first and foremost to the sacred. The community, by
contrast, has emerged from the sacred and separated itself from it. Mem-
bers of the community, then, are less suitable as ritual victims than are
nonmembers. That is why ritual victims are chosen from outside the
community, from creatures (like animals and strangers) that normally
dwell amidst sacred things and are themselves imbued with sacredness.

From our vantage point as objective observers the other members of the
community seem closer to the original victim and consequently far more
suitable, in accordance with the theory of imitation, as sacrificial objects.
But the viewpoint of the primordial religious experience is determined by
the generative violence. From that perspective the surrogate victim is
completely transformed. It is this transformation that serves to protect the
community from violence, that prevents the faithful from choosing one of
their own number as a replacement for the original victim, and that con-
sequently helps prevent any new outbreak of reciprocal violence. If the
ritual victim is drawn from outside the community—if the very fact of
choosing a victim bestows on him an aura of exteriority—the reason is
that the surrogate victim is not perceived as he really was—namely, as a
member of the community like all the others.

This choice should not, then, be attributed to a kind of primitive skepti-
cism. The centrifugal dynamism of the second substitution has its origins
in religion itself, in protective misapprehension. It has nothing to do with
a primitive effort to escape the tyranny of religion. And if the community
is spared, it is not because it has violated the law of exact imitation but
because it has rigorously observed it. Whatever deception is involved in
the sacrificial act must be attributed to the scapegoat mechanism, not to its
beneficiaries.

We should not conclude, however, that the surrogate victim is simply
foreign to the community. Rather, he is seen as a “monstrous double.” He
partakes of all possible differences within the community, particularly the
difference between within and without; for he passes freely from the
interior to the exterior and back again. Thus, the surrogate victim consti-
tutes both a link and a barrier between the community and the sacred. To
even so much as represent this extraordinary victim the ritual victim must
belong both to the community and to the sacred.

It should now be clear why ritual victims tend to be drawn from cate-
gories that are neither outside nor inside the community, but marginal to
it: slaves, children, livestock. This marginal quality is crucial to the proper
functioning of the sacrifice.

If the victim is to polarize the aggressive tendencies of the community
and effect their transfer to himself, continuity must be maintained. There
must be a “metonymic” relationship between members of the community
and ritual victims. There must also be discontinuity. The victim must be
neither too familiar to the community nor too foreign to it. We have
previously noted that this ambiguity is essential to the cathartic function-
ing of the sacrifice. But we could not explain how it was put into practice,
nor even imagine how an institution as subtle and complex as that of
sacrifice could function without its inventors (who are also its operators)
being aware of the secret of its operation. Now we see that there is noth-
ing surprising in this fact, at least on the level that concerns us here. Ritual
requires the sacrifice of a victim as similar as possible to the “monstrous
double.” The marginal categories from which these victims are generally
drawn barely fulfill this requirement, but they provide the least unsatis-
factory compromise. Situated as they are between the inside and the outside,
they can perhaps be said to belong to both the interior and the
exterior of the community.

Ritualistic thought does not limit itself to seeking out those categories
that are the least unsuited for supplying ritual victims. Once the victims
have been obtained, it strives in various ways to make them conform to its
own image of the original victim and simultaneously to increase their
quotient of cathartic potential. We consider that anything involving this
kind of intervention is sacrificial preparation; that is, our use of the term
goes beyond the usual definition of sacrificial preparation as the ritual
actions that immediately precede a sacrificial killing.

The victim should belong both to the inside and the outside of the
community. As there is no category that perfectly meets this requirement,
any creature chosen for sacrifice must fall short in one or another of the
contradictory qualities required of it. It will be deficient in its exterior or
its interior connections, but never in both at the same time. The goal is to
make the victim wholly sacrificeable. In its broadest sense, then, sacrificial
preparation employs two very different approaches. The first seeks to
make appear more foreign a victim who is too much a part of the com-
munity. The second approach seeks to reintegrate into the community a
victim who is too foreign to it.

The sacred king illustrates the first sort of preparation. His choice as king
is not sufficient to transform this future sacrificial victim into the “mon-
strous double” he must reincarnate. In order to eliminate his lingering and
superfluous humanity, in order to cut him off from the community, he is
required to commit an act of incest, thereby absorbing an enormous
charge of maleficent sacredness. At the end of the period of preparation
the king has taken on both the interior and the exterior qualities that are
required to transform him into a sacred monster.

The procedure must be inverted for a victim who sins by an excess of
exterior qualities. The sacrifice of cattle in the Dinka ceremonies,
described by Godfrey Lienhardt in Divinity and Experience, illustrates
this second type of sacrificial preparation.* The Dinka never sacrifice an
animal fresh from the herd. First it undergoes a period of isolation from its
fellow cattle, being sheltered in a special place adjacent to human habita-
tions. The halter it wears is reserved for sacrificial beasts. Invocations are
pronounced, destined to bring it closer to the community and link it to the
human members. We have already discussed the similar invocations that
treat the victim as a human being.

In summary, it is apparent that the intimate relationship that normally
exists between the Dinka and their cattle, remarkable though this rela-
tionship may be, is still not sufficient for sacrificial purposes. The identifi-
cation between man and beast must be such that the latter assumes the
role of the original outcast and draws all the reciprocal hostilities of the
community to itself. Every member of the community must be able to
consider the beast, before its metamorphosis into a “very sacred object,” as
the logical target for his anger.

Sacrificial preparations involve many actions that may seem contra-
dictory, but all are perfectly adapted to their goals. With persistent fore-
sight the religious mind pursues its ends and without realizing it fulfills all
the conditions for catharsis. Its only interest is to imitate the generative
violence as faithfully as possible. It strives to procure, and if need be to
invent, a sacrificial victim as similar as possible to its ambiguous vision of
the original victim. The model it imitates is not the true model, but a
model transfigured by the mechanism of the “monstrous double.” This
transfiguration, this primordial difference, directs all religious thought
toward victims that, thanks to their nature and sacrificial preparation, are
neither divisive nor trivial victims, thus assuring for the ritual performance
a cathartic value beneficial to the community that enacts it.

We encounter once again a remarkable fact: religious misapprehension
figures largely in the very real protection offered society by ritual sacrifice,
and indeed by religion in general.

Notes

1 Theuws, “Naitre et mourir dans le rituel Luba,” p. 172.
2 See Chapter 9, p. 260.
3 Emile Benveniste, La Vocabulaire des institutions indo-européennes, 2 vols. (Paris 1969), 2:78-79.
4 Ibid., p. 80.
5 Jeanmaire, Dionysos, p. 158.
6 Cf. Chapter 4, pp. 102-104.
7 Cf. Chapter 1, p. 13-14.

w

NID Pp
11
The Unity of All Rites



We may now turn our attention to certain ritual forms that, because of
their frankly disagreeable nature, are often regarded as aberrations. In fact
they are neither more nor less explicable than any other rites when
viewed without reference to generative violence, and they become per-
fectly intelligible when seen in that context. Our discussion of the second
type of sacrificial preparation—the integration into the community of a
victim of foreign origin—leads directly into a consideration of the most
notorious example of cannibalistic ritual, as practiced by the Tupinamba
Indians of northwest Brazil.'

The Tupinamba occupy a prominent place in the intellectual history of
modern Europe. The two Indians whom Montaigne met in Rouen and
referred to in his Essays were members of this tribe. They thus served as
models for the most famous pre-eighteenth-century portrait of the “noble
savage,” who was shortly to play a great role in the history of Western
humanism.

War was endemic among this people, who made it a practice to devour
all the enemies they could lay their hands on. However, their cannibalism
assumed two distinct forms. An enemy killed in the course of battle was
eaten on the spot without further ado. Outside the community and its
laws there was no place for ritual; undifferentiated violence held sway.

The ritual form of cannibalism was reserved for enemies who were
brought alive to the village. These prisoners lived for months and some-
times years on intimate terms with the men who would one day devour
them. They participated in their captors’ daily activities and married into
their families; much the same relationship existed for a while between
themselves and their sacrificers (for, as we shall see, we are dealing with
sacrifice here) as their sacrificers maintained among themselves.

The prisoner was subjected to two apparently contradictory modes of
treatment. Sometimes his sexual favors were sought after, and he was
treated with respect and even veneration. At other times he was the
object of abuse, showered with insults and blows.

Shortly before the date of his execution, the prisoner’s “escape” was
ritually staged. Invariably, of course, he was quickly recaptured and—for
the first time—bound with a heavy rope around his ankles. His master
now stopped giving him food, and he was forced to resort to stealing. One
of the early travelers cited by Métraux reports that the prisoner was “per-
mitted during this period to lay about him with his fists, to steal fowl and
geese and other things, and to do his utmost to avenge his coming death.”
In short, the future victim was encouraged to violate the laws. Most
modern observers agree that the purpose of these indulgences was to
transform the prisoner into a “scapegoat.” Francis Huxley remarks:

It is the fate of the prisoner to act out a number of contradictory roles and
incarnate them in himself. He is an enemy who is adopted; he takes the place
of the man in whose honour he will be killed; he is an in-law and an outcast;
he is honoured and reviled, a scapegoat and a hero; he is intimidated but, if he
shows fear, is thought unworthy of the death that awaits him. By acting out
these primarily social roles, he becomes a complete human being, exemplify-
ing the contradictions that society creates: an impossible situation, which can
only end in his death. The impossibility is exaggerated when he is charged, by
ritual, with the powers and attributes of the culture-hero: he becomes the
representative of the other world living in the centre of this one, a Janus figure
too sacred to live with.”

This is an admirable summary, although it should be added that the
recipient of society’s contradictory drives does not in the end appear as a
paragon of humanity, but as a “monstrous double” and a god. As Huxley
points out, it is the true relationship between society and human nature
that is laid forth here; and because this truth is intolerable, it must some-
how be expelled. This is where generative violence plays its role; its basic
function is to get rid of the truth, to transpose it beyond the realm of
human activity.

In order to understand this operation we must realize that the surrogate
victim actually brings about communal cohesion. Indeed, ritual cannibal-
ism remains inaccessible to the intellect unless some basis in social reality
can be found for it. And as long as we insist on interpreting the “scape-
goat” in purely psychological terms we can only assume that cannibals are
seeking some sort of moral justification for their acts of violence. It is true
that the more misdeeds the prisoner commits, the more legitimate the
sanctions imposed on him might appear. But the primary purpose of the
rites has nothing to do with satisfying some neurosis or putting to rest
some guilt complex. They are meant to bring about solid, concrete results.
If the modern mind fails to recognize the strongly functional nature of the
scapegoat operation and all its sacrificial surrogates, the most basic phe-
nomena of human culture will remain misunderstood and unresolved.

The mechanism of the surrogate victim is redemptive twice over: by
promoting unanimity it quells violence on all fronts, and by preventing an
outbreak of bloodshed within the community it keeps the truth about
men from becoming known. The mechanism transposes this truth to the
realm of the divine, in the form of an inscrutable god.

The prisoner drew to his person all the community’s inner tensions, all
its accumulated bitterness and hatred. Through his death he was
expected to transform maleficent violence into sacred beneficence, to
reinvigorate a depleted cultural order. Ritual cannibalism is a rite that
functions like any of the other rites I have discussed. The Tupinamba
were following a model—or rather, their ritual system was following a
model. They were trying to reproduce an original event that actually took
place, to recover the unanimity that occurred and recurred around the
person of the surrogate victim. If the prisoner was treated in two contra-
dictory ways, if he was sometimes vilified and sometimes honored, it was
because he represented the primordial victim. He was hated insofar as he
polarized the as yet untransformed violence; he was revered insofar as he
transformed the violence and set in motion the unifying mechanism of
the surrogate victim. The more detestable the victim was made to appear
and the more passion he aroused, the more effectively the machinery
functioned.

The role of the Tupinamba prisoner is, therefore, similar to that of the
African king. Consecrated by his future death, his person represents—not
successively, but simultaneously—two aspects of the sacred. He takes
upon himself the totality of violence during his lifetime and bears his
burden for eternity, beyond reach of time.

It seems likely that the prisoner was intended to reincarnate a mythical
hero who, in certain versions of Tupinamba legend, appeared as a prisoner
who was about to be executed and eaten. Thus, from the perspective
of the practitioners, ritual cannibalism was designed to reproduce a
primordial event.

The cannibalism of the Tupinambas, like the incestuous practices of
certain African monarchies, inflames our imagination and tends to dis-
tract attention from the essential intent of the ritual, the basic trait that it
shares with all other rituals: its sacrificial aspect. We are perhaps more
distracted by incest than by cannibalism, but only because cannibalism
has not yet found its Freud and been promoted to the status of a major
contemporary myth. Some modern film makers have tried, to be sure, to
bring cannibalism into fashion, but their efforts to date have been less
than successful.

Mircea Eliade makes the acute observation that the sacred precedes
cannibalism, that cannibalism may be said not to exist in a “natural” state.*
In other words, the victim is not killed to be eaten, but eaten because he
has been killed. The same is true of animal victims that are afterward
eaten. The cannibalistic element, then, requires no special explanation.
Moreover, it serves to help explain other, far more mysterious rites. The
eating of sacrificial flesh, whether animal or human, can be seen in the
light of mimetic desire as a veritable cannibalism of the human spirit in
which the violence of others is ritually devoured. Mimetic desire, once
frustrated, seeks at once to destroy and to absorb the violence incarnated
with the model-obstacle. This explains why cannibals are always eager for
their victim to demonstrate by a show of courage that he is the incarnation
of supreme violence. And, of course, the victim is eaten only after he has
been killed, after the maleficent violence has been completely transformed
into a beneficent substance, a source of peace, strength, and fecundity.

Once we have recognized that ritual cannibalism is simply another form
of sacrificial rite, the prisoner’s preliminary adoption and partial assimila-
tion into the tribe that is going to eat him no longer presents a mystery.
Because the victim comes from outside the community, from the realm of
the undifferentiated sacred, he is too foreign to be immediately eligible as
a proper sacrificial offering. If he is to become a true representative of the
original victim he must first establish some sort of relationship with the
group and be made to appear like an “insider’—without, however, sur-
rendering that sacred exteriority that remains his essential characteristic.

Through the process of sacrificial preparation the victim acquires a suf-
ficient resemblance to the “natural,” direct target of violence—that is, the
other members of the community—to ensure the transference of their
aggressions and to make him an attractive sacrificial object. At the same
time, he remains sufficiently foreign for his death not to risk plunging the
community into a cycle of revenge. The only person able, and perhaps to
some extent required, to espouse the victim’s cause is his wife. But
she must not be too insistent in her protests, or she too (along with her
children, if she has any) will be summarily executed.

It is now clear how a scrupulous imitation of the surrogate victim,
though necessarily affected by the transformation of the first victim, estab-
lishes a system of ritual practices that conforms to the needs of the
community. These practices ensure the “purgation” of violence, its trans-
ference to victims whose relationship to the community is neither too
close nor too distant; who are, in short, suitable figures for relieving the
community of its burden of violence and effecting its “purification.” It is
equally clear that this system (including the sacrificial preparation that
contributes to the “efficiency” of the total operation) can arise purely and
simply from an effort to imitate the original murder, the act that either
established or reestablished communal unity.

The prisoner’s adoption by the community should be regarded as
belonging to the second type of sacrificial preparation referred to above.
Ritual cannibalism resembles African kingship in that the future victim is
consecrated during his lifetime. To discern the relationship between the
two rites we might think in terms of Jean Genet’s Death-watch, which
deals with a condemned prisoner whose favors are sought by a pair of
petty criminals—“enemy brothers,” so to speak—who are fascinated by
the prospect of his imminent execution.

The relationship between the African kingship system and the cannibal-
ism of the Tupinambas is somewhat blurred because in the former case the
victim is drawn from within the community, in the latter from without.
The process of sacrificial preparation functions in a contradictory manner
to achieve the same results in both cases. By integrating the prisoner
within the community the Tupinamba are pursuing the same goal as the
Dinka, who separate their sacrificial beast from the herd and shelter it
among the villagers. Among the Tupinamba the practical application of
the principle is carried to far greater lengths. And the tribe’s extraordinary
adoption of the prisoner seems to support my theory that the surrogate
victim is fundamentally a member of the community, a neighbor of those
destined to kill him. The Tupinamba seem to have been particularly con-
scious of the “nearness” of the original victim, and in order to reproduce
this quality without compromising the sacrificial effectiveness of the rite,
they devised a system of implacable logic and rare ingenuity.

As in the case of the Tsimshians (see Chapter 9), violence among the
Tupinamba is shifted from the interior of the community to the exterior.
This displacement is sacrificial in character and is by no means limited to
mere verbiage; the communities actually go to war with one another and
devour their respective members. Here again it can be said that the tribes
have come to an agreement never to agree; that a permanent state of war
is maintained for the express purpose of providing victims for ritual can-
nibalism. The number of captives on either side should be more or less
equal in order to constitute a more or less reciprocal exchange; and this
exchange would seem somehow to be linked to the exchange of women,
which is also (again, as in the case of the Tsimshians) accompanied by
violence. But whether it is a question of prisoners or women, the
exchange ritualized into warfare and the warfare ritualized into exchange
are both variants of the same sacrificial shift from the interior of the com-
munity to the exterior. Both are equally beneficial in that they keep vio-
lence from exploding precisely where it would do the most damage, in the
midst of the elementary group. Thus, the interminable vengeance engulf-
ing two rival tribes may be read as an obscure metaphor for vengeance that
has been effectively shifted from the interior of the community. This dis-
placement is not, of course, mere shadow play. The system works
precisely because the intimate rivalry between the groups is very real.
Moreover, it is evident that this sort of warfare cannot always be confined
within reasonable limits.

The various meanings of the word fobajara seem to define the para-
meters of the type of ritual cannibalism practiced by the Tupinambas. In its
primary sense it designates the symmetrical posture assumed by the sub-
ject in regard to the opposition, the hostile confrontation. The word is
related to a verb meaning “to be face to face, to be opposite.”*

It is worth noting, with regard to tobajara, that the prisoner’s murder is
carried out in a manner that resembles as closely as possible the structure
of single combat. The victim is tied with a rope but given enough free play
to allow him to defend himself, for a limited time, against the attack of his
solitary adversary, his own personal fobajara.

It is not surprising that the word febajara refers specifically to the victim
of cannibalism. But the word also has a third meaning: “brother-in-law.”
The brother-in-law is the substitute for the brother, the most natural
adversary. In exchange for one of his women, the brother-in-law is ceded
a woman “too close” to the giver, awoman who would inevitably become
the object of fraternal rivalry if the men of the elementary community
reserved their women for their own use. The brother-in-law, then,
becomes the sacrificial substitute for the brother as hostile object. The
entire structure of the sacrificial system is implicit in the triple semantic
thrust of fobajara. And this structure reminds us once more of Greek tra-
gedy, which abounds in enemy brothers and enemy brothers-in-law, for
example, Eteocles and Polyneices, Oedipus and Creon.

The ideology of ritual cannibalism brings to mind the nationalistic
myths of our own modern world. Of course it is conceivable that the
observers have distorted the natives’ own explanations, but even if this
were the case, the distortions would not effect the general outline of my
interpretation. A sacrificial cult based on war and the reciprocal murder of
prisoners is not substantially different from nineteenth-century national-
istic myths with their concept of an “hereditary enemy.” To insist on the
differences between two myths of this type is in effect to succumb to the
mystique of the myths themselves, to turn away from the identical reality
residing at the center of each. In both instances the basic function of
foreign wars, and of the more or less spectacular rites that generally
accompany them, is to avert the threat of internal dissension by adopting
a form of violence that can be openly endorsed and fervently acted upon
by all.

In his novel 1984 George Orwell portrays the dictators of two super-
states as cynically resolved to perpetuate their struggle in order to main-
tain permanent control over their mesmerized subjects. The institution of
ritual cannibalism, based on the principle of permanent war and designed
to perpetuate domestic tranquillity, reminds us that the modern world has
no monopoly on such strategems. It also demonstrates that the concept of
permanent warfare is not particular to sophisticated and unscrupulous
tyrants but can be put into practice by the primitive communities.

It is not difficult to see the relationship between Tupinamba cannibal-
ism and a theory of ritual based on the concept of the surrogate victim. In
fact, this relationship serves to illuminate aspects of the Tupinamba prac-
tice that have hitherto seemed obscure; reciprocally, the Tupinamba cus-
toms bring into relief certain aspects of the theory that my examination of
other rites neglected or ignored.

Limited though they are in number, the ritual practices I have men-
tioned differ greatly in character as well as in geographical location. Yet in
spite of their diversity they all seem to support my claim that the surrogate
victim is the basis for all religious systems. It might be prudent, however,
to examine still another type of ritual, one that may serve to invalidate
this line of argument.

The rites I have discussed up to this point might be said to perpetuate or
reinforce certain domestic or religious systems. Their purpose is the main-
tenance of the status quo, and this purpose explains why they all center
around that exemplary guarantor of cultural stability, the unanimous act
of violence directed against the surrogate victim.

These rites may be defined as rites of stability or stasis. However, there
also exists a body of rites generally referred to as rites of passage. I have
not yet considered such rites in the light of my theory; I will not attempt
to demonstrate that the surrogate victim lies at the heart of these rites
as well.

Rites of passage have to do with the acquisition of a new status. For
example, there are initiation rites that confer on adolescents full admis-
sion to the community. In our own society the passage from one status to
another presents—at least in theory—only minor problems of adaptation,
which are limited to those individuals directly involved in the process,
those who are actually making the passage. Although this belief has been
somewhat shaken in recent times, it continues to exert a strong influence
on our thought and conduct.

In primitive societies, however, the slightest change in the status of an
isolated individual is treated as if it carried the potential to create a major
crisis. What to us appear to be perfectly normal and predictable transi-
tions, essential to the preservation of the social unit, are regarded by
primitive man as portents of apocalyptic upheaval.

Arnold Van Gennep’s Rites of Passage (the work that introduced the term
into ethnological parlance) distinguishes two distinct stages in a primi-
tive’s change of status. In the first stage he loses his previous status, and in
the second he acquires his new one. To attribute this observation to a
typically French predilection for neat Cartesian categories would be
somewhat unfair, for Van Gennep’s analysis does conform to the pro-
cesses of religious thought. Religious thought does indeed distinguish
between these stages, perceiving them as quite independent of one
another, separated by a gap that could well become a terrible abyss
swallowing up the entire cultural structure.

Van Gennep’s observations serve to underline the critical aspect of the
process. When he focuses on the initial loss of status, he calls to mind
that loss of difference I described earlier; suddenly we find ourselves on
familiar terrain. For if all violence involves a loss of difference, all losses of
difference also involve violence; and this violence is contagious. Thus we
are dealing with the sort of dilemma we encountered in the case of twins.
Religious thought makes no distinctions between natural and cultural
differences. Perfectly innocent phenomena can provoke fear, but that fear
cannot for that reason be dismissed as mere fantasy: there is nothing
fantastical about its impact or its results.

The individual who is “in passage” is regarded in the same light as a
criminal or as the victim of an epidemic: his mere physical presence
increases the risk of violence. The slightest loss of difference, no matter
how isolated the case may be, is capable of plunging the entire community
into a sacrificial crisis. The slightest tear in the social fabric can spoil the
whole garment if not promptly attended to.

Clearly, the first measure in such a situation is to isolate the victim, to
forbid all contact between him and the healthy members of the com-
munity; he must be placed in quarantine. All suspected victims are
included in this proscription. They are kept on the periphery of the com-
munity or sometimes even exiled to the forest, jungle, or desert. There
undifferentiated violence reigns; there is the sacred realm inhabited by
beings devoid of those stable differences, of that fixed status, possessed by
men who have freed themselves from the power of the sacred.

Because the modern mind conceives contagion solely in terms of
microbiology, it sees no reason why any particular loss of status cannot be
restricted to its specific case. Primitive societies view the matter differ-
ently. For them, any change in individual status threatens to become
universal. It is the nature of such changes to spread like a disease; the
individual becomes the first victim and prime carrier of his own infection.
In some societies the individual in passage is stripped of his name, his
history, and his family connections; he is reduced to an amorphous state
of anonymity. In collective initiations, where adolescents of the same age
participate together in rites of passage, total equality and unrestricted
promiscuity is the rule.

As we have seen, differences disappear in the domain of the sacred only
because they are indiscriminately mixed together and become indis-
tinguishable in the confusion. To be associated with the sacred is to share
in this monstrosity; to be lacking in differences or over-equipped with
them comes to the same thing. That is why the initiate can appear both asa
hermaphroditic aberration and as a creature with no sexual identity at all.

The rite of passage is always an awesome experience, because it is
impossible to predict at the outset what its course will be. Although the
initiate knows what he is losing, he has no idea what he will be taking on.
Violence will determine the final result of this monstrous mixture of
differences, and the less one has to do with that, the better. In short,
structure and change don’t go together. And even when change looks
predictable to us, religious man fears that it might become uncontrollable.
The idea of a nature subservient to social laws, or even to natural laws, is
utterly foreign to primitive religion.

“Conservative” is a word too weak to describe the rigidity of spirit and
terror of change that characterizes those societies in which the sacred
holds sway. The imposition of a socio-religious order appears as an enor-
mous boon, an unhoped-for act of grace that could at any moment be
withdrawn. There is no question of subjecting the order to critical evalu-
ation or comparison, of trying to alter and improve it in any way. The
primitive mind would regard such endeavors as at once impious and
insane, guaranteed to provoke the violent retribution of the gods. The
proper posture for man is watchfulness and immobility. A single careless
gesture could unleash a holocaust in which society would be utterly
destroyed.

Although the prospect of the passage may appear terrifying to the
primitive mind, it also offers hope. After all, it was by way of a general
outbreak of violence and universal loss of difference—that is, by way of
sacrificial crisis—that the community achieved a differentiated order in
former times. And it can be hoped that this crisis will achieve the same
results. Differences will be restored or established; specifically, the neo-
phyte will gain his coveted new status. A happy outcome must depend on
the good will of supreme violence, but the community believes that it can
influence this outcome by channeling the “bad” energy into prearranged
outlets. In order for the final results to match those of the original action,
however, every possible precaution must be taken to follow the original
model. The neophytes must adhere to the rules laid down by tradition;
they must try to shape the new event in the mold of the old one. For only
if the ritual reiterates the original crisis is there hope that the outcome will
be the same.

Such is the reasoning behind these rites of passage. We can now readily
understand that some of the most bizarre aspects of the rites, variations
that have previously been dismissed as “morbid” or “perverse,” are simply
the logical outcome of certain basic religious views. Instead of avoiding
the crisis, the neophyte must advance to meet it, as his ancestors did
before him. Instead of fleeing the most painful and terrifying aspects of
reciprocal violence, he must submit to each and every one of them in the
proper sequence. The postulant must endure hardship, hunger, even tor-
ture, because these ordeals were part of the original experience. In some
instances it is not enough to submit to violence; one must also inflict
violence. This double obligation corresponds to the “bad” reciprocity
associated with the sacrificial crisis. It also reminds us that the celebrants
in certain festivals are required to perform a number of actions that are
normally forbidden: real or symbolic acts of sexual aggression, stealing,
the eating of proscribed foods. In some societies cannibalism, prohibited at
all other times, forms the essence of the initiation rites. For the Tupinamba
the murder of a prisoner constitutes the rite. Indeed, in many societies the
ultimate act of initiation is the killing of an animal or a human being.

Any man deprived of his status is transformed into a “monstrous
double.” For the initiate, this transformation is exteriorized. Sometimes
he assumes the role of an animal, threatening to pounce on and devour
anyone who comes near him. Like Dionysus or the sacred king, he
becomes a lion or a leopard for the duration of the initiatory crisis,
expressing himself solely in growls and roars. In some rites, normally
marking the culmination of the crisis, he exhibits all the characteristics of
violent possession. The successive stages of the rites allow us to trace the
real or supposed evolution of the crisis.

Other rites offer additional proof that the entire course of the ceremony
is modeled on the original crisis. In addition to rites specifically designed
to simulate the crisis itself, we encounter details that reproduce the
unanimous violence directed against the surrogate victim and that clearly
serve to bring the whole ritualistic process to a close. The introduction of
masks at the supreme moment of the process can be taken as a direct
allusion to the monstrous double, whose presence had already been
suggested by the “metamorphoses” of the neophytes. The forms of the
ceremonies may vary widely, but they all bear witness to the violent
resolution of the crisis and the subsequent return to order: that is, to the
neophytes’ assumption of their new and definitive status.

The purpose of rites of passage, then, is to graft onto the model of the
original crisis any burgeoning crisis brought into being by a sudden out-
break of undifferentiation; in other words, to change into certainty that
awful uncertainty that accompanies contagious violence. With regular
repetition and a pattern of success, these rites are gradually transformed
into simple tests or trials, becoming increasingly “symbolic” and formal-
istic. The sacrificial nature of the rites tends to become obscured with the
passage of time until finally it is hard to say what the symbols are intended
to symbolize.

As we have seen, there is no real difference between rites of passage and
rites intended to maintain the status quo. In both cases the model is the
same. The sole purpose of ritual is to ensure total immobility, or failing
that, a minimum of disturbance. If the door is opened to admit change,
there is always the risk that violence and chaos will force an entry. Some
change, of course, is inevitable; men cannot be prevented from growing
up, marrying, falling sick, and dying. But primitive societies have found
procedures to direct the dangerous flow of energy generated by these
events into channels prepared by the cultural order. Some societies even
have rituals to cope with the change of seasons. Wherever there is a
potential for dangerous change, the remedy lies in ritual; and the rites
invariably entail a repetition of the original solution, a rebirth of differ-
ences. The model for cultural stability is identical with the model for non-
catastrophic change. In the final analysis, then, rites of passage have the
same function and the same origin as all other rites.

That is not to say that rites of passage do not have distinctive character-
istics. Their most spectacular elements are modeled on the crisis itself
(rather than on the resolution of the crisis, as is true of most other rites),
and this emphasis gives them their particular initiatory quality. This is also
why these rites tend to linger on during periods of general decadence,
maintaining their hold even when the most fundamental ritualistic prac-
tices have fallen into neglect or disappeared completely. As we have
already observed, the generative conclusion is the first thing to disappear.
This disappearance cuts the umbilical cord, so to speak, that links all rites
to generative violence. The rites then appear to exist on their own,
although this is pure illusion.

With the passage of time the terror inspired by the original crisis fades
from memory. The younger generation no longer respects the prohib-
itions laid down by the religious system or watches jealously over its
preservation. The younger men have no personal acquaintance with
maleficent violence. In subjecting them to rites of passage the culture is
trying to induce a state of mind favorable to the perpetuation of a differen-
tiated system. It attempts to recreate the atmosphere of sacred terror
and veneration characteristic of its ancestral period, when rites and
prohibitions were scrupulously observed.

The structure of the sacrificial crisis and of generative violence permits
us to understand the means by which violence is deflected and diffused in
human society, and this in turn explains why rites of passage can fulfill a
function only as long as they maintain their character as impressive, pain-
ful, and at times almost unendurable ordeals. As always, it isa question of
keeping the sacrificial crisis in check; in this instance, the concern is
directed at the inexperienced neophyte whose youthful impetuosity
could well unleash a new crisis.

Rites of passage give the young person a foretaste of what lies in store
for anyone rash enough to neglect or transgress prescribed religious rit-
uals. Thanks to these rites, successive generations acquire a healthy
respect for the awesomeness of the sacred and learn to perform their
religious obligations in such a way as to assure the stability of the cultural
order. Physical hardships speak louder than intellectual arguments; it is
these hardships that make the establishment of the socio-religious order
appear an extraordinary blessing.

Rites of passage thus constitute a vitally important force in the conser-
vation of institutions. They assure the dominance of generations long
gone over generations yet to come. It would be wrong, however, to regard
them as a conscious political device for keeping the young in their place, a
scheme directed by the haves against the have-nots. As with all the rites
discussed previously, the mechanisms set in motion by rites of passage can
never be fully anticipated. In fact, their effectiveness seems to depend on
their not being viewed in the context of strict social utility. Their efficacy is
a consequence of the religious attitude in general, which precludes all
those forms of conscious social engineering that modern man likes to
think he can detect in the socially efficient traditional organizations.

The pattern recurs in all forms of initiation—initiation into adulthood,
into secret societies, into a religious order, or, into a shamanistic fraternity.
The shaman’s initiation, for instance, differs from the others only in the
dramatic and rigorous quality of the hardships the initiate must endure
and in the explicit identification with a divinity or spirit whose awesome
and fantastic adventures recall the mechanism of the surrogate victim.

The shaman claims mastery over supernatural forces. If he wishes to
acquire the means of ridding men of illnesses, the apprentice shaman
must first expose himself to the full fury of these illnesses—that is, expose
himself to maleficent violence. He emerges triumphant from an ordeal
that would have killed an ordinary mortal, thus demonstrating that he
not only enjoys the protection of Supreme Violence but also shares in its
power and can even, to some extent, effect the transformation of “bad”
into “good” violence.

Even the most fantastic details of the shaman’s initiation faithfully
reflect a ritualistic viewpoint on generative violence. In isolated cultures
as far apart as Australia and Asia the initiation culminates in a vision of
dismemberment, after which the neophyte awakens or, rather, is reborn
as a full-fledged shaman. This final vision calls to mind the collective ritual
dismemberment of the Dionysiac rites, the diasparagmos, and many similar
rituals of diverse provenance. Dismemberment is emblematic of triumph
and resurrection; it reflects the operation of the surrogate victim, the
transformation of maleficent violence into beneficent violence. The neo-
phyte experiences the same metamorphosis as the mythical creatures
whose help he will later require in the exercise of his shamanistic func-
tions. And if he manages to secure their aid, it will be because he is able to
approach them on equal terms, as someone who has shared their
experiences.

Shamanism is like a theatrical performance in which one actor plays all
the roles at once. The lead role, however, is clearly that of commander in
chief of the forces of Good, which finally rout the forces of Evil. This final
expulsion is frequently associated with some kind of symbolic object; for
example, the healer may hold up a twig or a bit of cotton that he claims to
have extracted from the body of the patient and that supposedly caused
the illness.

The Greek term for an evil object extracted by means of a similar ritual
is katharma. This term was also used as a variant of pharmakos to designate
a sacrificial human victim.

In the ritual context of crisis and victimization, interpreted as an expul-
sion of evil, the extraction of a shamanistic katharma becomes intelligible.
The illness is equated to the crisis; it can lead either to death or to a cure,
invariably seen as the expulsion of “impurities’—spiritual impurities in
the form of evil spirits or physical impurities in the form of the shaman-
istic object. Once again, the process is based on a repetition of a successful
scapegoat effect. The patient is induced to give birth to his own cure, just
as the entire community at one time gave birth, in the midst of collective
violence, to a new order. The extracted object had no place in the human
organism and no right to be there. It was something brought in by outside
forces. It plays the part of the actual surrogate victim, whereas the human
organism, fully mobilized against the invader, takes the part of the collect-
ivity. If, as has long been assumed, primitive medicine is indeed ritualistic
in nature, then it is not surprising that its primary purpose is to reproduce
the generative process.

The word katharsis refers primarily to the mysterious benefits that
accrue to the community upon the death of a human katharma or
pharmakos. The process is generally seen as a religious purification and
takes the form of cleansing or draining away impurities. Shortly before
his execution the pharmakos is paraded ceremonially through the streets
of the village. It is believed that he will absorb all the noxious influ-
ences that may be abroad and that his death will transpose them out-
side the community. This is a mythical representation of what does in
fact almost take place. The communal violence is indeed drawn to the
person of the surrogate victim, but the final resolution cannot be
described as the expulsion of some substance. The interpretation thus
approaches the truth but fails to attain it because it fails to perceive
three essential facts: the mimetic nature of reciprocal violence, the arbi-
trary choice of the victim, and the unanimous polarization of hostility
that produces the reconciliation. To view violence as an impurity or
blemish that is located in a physical substance is to materialize violence
once again. When the shaman draws forth from his patient an object
he identifies as the sickness itself he is transferring and transforming
this mythical interpretation into yet another form—that of a small,
insignificant object.

In addition to its religious sense and its particular meaning in the con-
text of shamanism, the word katharsis has a specific use in medical
language. A cathartic medicine is a powerful drug that induces the evacu-
ation of humors or other substances judged to be noxious. The illness and
its cure are often seen as one; or at least, the medicine is considered
capable of aggravating the symptoms, bringing about a salutary crisis that
will lead to recovery. In other words, the crisis is provoked by a sup-
plementary dosage of the affliction resulting in the expulsion of the
pathogenetic agents along with itself. The operation is the same as that of
the human katharma, although in medicine the act of purgation is not
mythic but real.

The mutations of meaning from the human katharma to the medical
katharsis are paralleled by those of the human pharmakos to the medical
pharmakon, which signifies at once “poison” and “remedy.” In both cases
we pass from the surrogate victim—or rather, his representative—to a
drug that possesses a simultaneous potential for good and for bad, one
that serves as a physical transposition of sacred duality. Plutarch’s use of
the expression kathartikon pharmakon seems meaningfully redundant in
this context.

The “translation” of this violent process into terms of expulsion, evacu-
ation, and surgical operations is made in the most diverse cultures. For
example, the Swazi Incwala involves ritual acts whose literal meanings
denote the biting, cutting, and slicing of the new year. These words belong
to a semantic grouping that includes a variety of highly significant oper-
ations, from the consummation of the king’s first marriage to decisive
victory in an armed conflict. The common denominator appears to be
acute suffering destined to assure recovery from an illness or designed to
bring about the natural or artificial resolution of a potential crisis. The
same grouping designates the therapeutic action of certain substances. In
the course of the Incwala rites the king spits out magic medicinal potions,
first toward the east, then toward the west. The term Incwala is apparently
connected with the notion of cleanliness, the process of cleansing by
evacuation. As has been mentioned (see above, Chapter 4) the ceremony
concludes with a great fire that consumes the accumulated refuse of the
past year. Max Gluckman describes the general effect of the rites in terms
of “Aristotelian catharsis.”

Katharma and katharsis are derived from katharos. If we wished to group
together all the themes associated with these terms, we would find our-
selves with a veritable catalog of the subjects discussed here under the
double heading of violence and the sacred. Katharma is not limited to the
victim or the surrogate object; it also refers to the supreme efforts of a
mythic or tragic hero. Plutarch speaks of the pontia katharmata, expulsions
that purified the seas, with reference to the labors of Heracles. Kathairo
means, among other things, “to purge the land of monsters.” Its secondary
meaning, “to whip,” may appear puzzling in this context, until we recall
the practice of whipping the pharmakos on the genitals.

It is worth noting that katharsis is used in connection with purification
ceremonies that form part of the “mysteries” initiation rites; the word is
also sometimes used to designate menstruation. Such usages make it clear
that we are not dealing here with a heterogeneous collection of refer-
ences, but rather with a unified system, to which the surrogate victim
holds the key.

Whenever we describe the generative process or its products in terms of
expulsion, purgation, or purification, we are attributing natural causes to
phenomena that are not in the least natural, because they derive from
violence. Expulsions, evacuations, and purgations are found in nature;
the natural model does indeed exist. But its reality should not distract us
from the extraordinary role that this model has played in the history of
the human imagination, from primitive religious rituals and shamanistic
medicine down to the present day. The pattern outlined in Chapter 8
should provide the perspective. Violence furnishes the initial impetus for
the discovery of the model, which is applied in mythic fashion to violence
itself, in nonmythic fashion to natural phenomena. The miracle of
restored unanimity prompts the conception of the model, which is seen as
a combination of natural and cultural influences. The human imagination
has regularly reverted to it on many and diverse occasions. Even today we
have not succeeded in sorting the arbitrary from the nonarbitrary ele-
ments, the useful from the useless, the significant from the insignificant.
This failure has been particularly striking in the field of psychopathology.

The obsessive concern during the seventeenth century with clysters and
bleedings, with assuring the efficient evacuation of peccant humors,
shows plainly that the medical practices of that age were based on the
principle of expulsion and purification. These practices constitute, in fact,
a slightly refined variant of the shaman’s approach with its emphasis on
the extraction of the physical katharma.

It is easy to laugh, with Moliére, at quack doctors and their gargantuan
clysters, but physical purging, for better or for worse, is a real process. And
what about the modern practice of immunization and inoculation? The
model is the same in both cases; clearly, its technique and theory can be
applied to pseudo-discoveries as well as to real ones. The patient’s
defenses, according to modern theory, must be reinforced so that he can
repulse a microbiotic invasion by his own means. The beneficent process is
still conceived in terms of an invasion repulsed, a harmful intruder chased
from the premises. There is no question of mockery here, because the
process is scientifically sound. The physician inoculates the patient with a
minute amount of the disease, just as, in the course of the rites, the com-
munity is injected with a minute amount of violence, enabling it to ward
off an attack of full-fledged violence. The analogies abound. “Booster
shots,” for instance, correspond to the repetition of sacrificial rites. And of
course, in all varieties of “sacrificial” protection there is always the danger
of a catastrophic inversion; a too virulent vaccine, a too powerful pharma-
kon, can promote the illness it was supposed to prevent. In the first chapter
Iused vaccination as a metaphor to illustrate certain aspects of sacrifice.
Now we can see that vaccination, like so many other human institutions,
really amounts to a metaphorical displacement of sacrifice.

Once again we encounter a relic of the primitive mind in modern scien-
tific thinking, a reflection of the imaginative impulse set in motion by
generative violence. We discover that a technological tool of undisputed
utility is not unrelated to the crudest sort of ritualistic medicine. Certainly
we cannot claim that primitive practices stem from a mode of thought that
is entirely different from our own. Of course there are differences; certain
substitutions take place, and there is a constant shifting of position as one
mode of thought merges with another. However, there is no reason to
regard the various results of these operations as separate entities, for the
process, after all, consists by definition of a series of displacements analo-
gous to those that went before and those that are due to follow (or due not
to follow); in other words, to a series of metaphorical substitutions that
owe their variety to the fact that none of them ever wholly succeeds in
reproducing the essence of a single, unique process.

If we wish to complete our picture of the various meanings of katharsis
we must returm, once more, to Greek tragedy. As yet I have made no
specific reference to Aristotle’s use of the term in his Poetics. It scarcely
seems necessary to do so at this point, for I have already established that
tragedy springs from mythic and ritual forms. As for the function of
tragedy, Aristotle has already defined it for us. In describing the tragic
effect in terms of katharsis he asserts that tragedy can and should assume
at least some of the functions assigned to ritual in a world where ritual has
almost disappeared.

As we have seen, the tragic figure of Oedipus becomes the original
katharma. Once upon a time a temple and an altar on which the victim
was sacrificed were substituted for the original act of collective violence;
now there is an amphitheater and a stage on which the fate of the kat-
harma, played out by an actor, will purge the spectators of their passions
and provoke a new katharsis, both individual and collective. This katharsis
will restore the health and well-being of the community.

“The unity of a given ritual,” says Victor Turner in The Drums of Affliction,
“is a dramatic unity. It is in this sense a work of art.”” If we agree with this
opinion—and it would be difficult to disagree—the reverse should be true
as well: a given dramatic performance constitutes a sort ofrite, the shadowy
similitude of the religious experience.

The Aristotelian use of katharsis has provoked endless discussion and will
doubtless continue to do so. Modern theorists seek to establish the precise
sense that the word had for the philosopher. They brush aside its religious
implications because, as they claim, these implications were no longer
current in Aristotle’s time—were, indeed, hardly less obscure then than
they are today. The modern inability to grasp the nature of these implica-
tions makes it even harder to come to terms with Aristotle’s use of the
word.

Yet in order for the term katharsis to assume a sacrificial character in
the Poetics it was not necessary for Aristotle to be aware of the original
operation. Indeed, his ignorance of that operation was almost a require-
ment. If tragedy was to function as a sort of ritual, something similar to a
sacrificial killing had to be concealed in the dramatic and literary use of
katharsis, just as it was concealed in the religious and medical use of the
term. It is precisely because Aristotle failed to penetrate the secret of sacri-
ficial rites that his tragic katharsis ultimately constitutes only another
sacrificial displacement. It takes its rightful place among all the other dis-
placements, gravitating around the generative violence that owes its
enduring efficacy to its elusiveness.

On closer inspection, Aristotle’s text is something of a manual of sac-
rificial practices, for the qualities that make a “good” tragic hero are
precisely those required of the sacrificial victim. If the latter is to polar-
ize and purge the emotions of the community, he must at once
resemble the members of the community and differ from them; he must
be at once insider and outsider, both “double” and incarnation of the
“sacred difference.” He must be neither wholly good nor wholly bad. A
certain degree of goodness is required in the tragic hero in order to
establish sympathy between him and the audience; yet a certain degree
of weakness, a “tragic flaw” is needed, to neutralize the goodness and
permit the audience to tolerate the hero’s downfall and death. Freud
touches upon this situation in Totem and Taboo, but he leaves the matter
unresolved. Having accompanied the hero part of the way, the audience
suddenly perceives him as wholly “other” and abandons him to his fate,
his superhuman ignominy and glory. The spectator may shudder with
“pity and fear,” but he must also feel a deep sense of gratitude for his
own orderly and relatively secure existence. Every true work of art
might be said to partake of the initiatory process in that it forces itself
upon the emotions, offers intimations of violence, and instills a respect
for the power of violence; that is, it promotes prudence and discourages
hubris.

Aristotle is discretely vague about which emotions tragedy is meant to
purge. But if we see tragedy in terms of a fire used to combat fire, it is clear
that its purpose is to protect the community against its own violence. The
philosopher asserts that the only violence appropriate to tragic action is
violence between close relatives.

If tragedy were a direct adaptation of rites, as some erudite theoreti-
cians have claimed, it would itself constitute a work of erudition, and its
esthetic and kathartic potential would be in no way superior to that of
the Cambridge Ritualists. If tragedy is, or once was, rich in katharsis, that
can only be attributed to the antiritualistic aspects of its original inspir-
ation. Tragedy advances toward the truth in the face of reciprocal
violence and while assuming the guise of reciprocal violence. But it
invariably draws back at the last minute. As soon as mythical and ritual-
istic differences are seriously challenged, they are replaced by “cultural”
and “esthetic” differences. Tragedy thus shares a fundamental experience
with ritual. Both have advanced to the very brink of that terrible abyss
wherein all differences disappear. Both have been permanently marked
by the ordeal.

If tragedy has a sacrificial character, then it must possess a maleficent
aspect—a Dionysiac aspect, as Nietzsche would put it—as well as a benefi-
cent, regulatory, Apollonian cultural role. (A parenthetic remark on
Nietszche: although his classifications are manifestly superior to the
approaches of most critics, they fail to perceive, or at most perceive only
dimly, that each and every divinity corresponds to both aspects at once.)

The fundamental duality of tragedy led to the opposing formulations of
Aristotle and Plato. Given his time and place, Aristotle was correct to
define tragedy in terms of its cathartic qualities. But then, Aristotle is
always “correct.” That is why he is so great, and so one-sided in his great-
ness. Aristotle is above and beyond the crisis of tragedy. He incorporates
into his theory all the meanings and reasons that pertain to the misunder-
standing of this crisis. In choosing Aristotle as their mentor the formalistic
literary critics could not have done better, for Aristotle views tragedy
solely from the perspective of order. In his view the art of tragedy affirms,
consolidates, and preserves everything that deserves to be affirmed,
consolidated, and preserved.

Plato, by contrast, is closer in time and spirit to the crisis. It is not the
stately affirmation of great cultural rites that he discerns in Oedipus the
King, but rather the undermining of differences. Plato’s attention is caught
by tragic reciprocity, by those very aspects that are always eliminated by a
formalistic or structuralist reading of the drama; by all those aspects, in
short, that William Arrowsmith refers to as constituting the play’s tragic
“turbulence.”°

Paradoxically, it was Plato’s own acute insight into the nature of tragic
inspiration that provoked his hostility to drama. He saw tragedy as open-
ing a window onto the dark and dangerous origins of social values, as
somehow posing a challenge to the very concept of civic order. In Oedipus
the King the public’s attention is insidiously diverted from the com-
munity’s efforts to rid itself of the pharmakos to the pharmakos itself, with
whom the poet and poetry tend to side. The poet, like many a modern
intellectual, reveals an ambiguous attitude toward those beings whom the
stricken city has driven from its precincts in an effort to regain its lost
unity. Even when he is not actually espousing suspect causes, the poet
retells ancient, time-honored legends in a new way, giving thema slightly
impious and seditious ring. The city, says Plato, must protect itself from
subversion; therefore it must rid itself of subversive elements. Sophocles
must join Oedipus on the road to exile; the poet too must become a
pharmakos.

This situation goes unperceived by rationalist and humanist critics.
Their pursuit of what one might perhaps call the “meaning of meanings”
leads them away from the source of tragic inspiration and away from
undifferentiated violence. By reinforcing and consolidating all the differ-
ences, they effectively close the interstices through which violence and
the sacred can pass. They succeed so well that they manage to do away
with any cathartic value the work might possess. We are left with plati-
tudinous reflections on the work’s “cultural values,” or with pure erudi-
tion, pure classification. Such critics do not seem to realize that by
divorcing tragedy from the essential drama of mankind, from the conflict
of war and peace and love and hate, they are emptying the work of its
tragic substance and preparing a new swing of the pendulum back to
tragedy. Nowhere in their works do we encounter an adequate response
to the genuine terror of such a work as The Bacchae.”

Any great writer puts critical platitudes to nought and reveals all pro-
nouncements about literature as shot through with ambiguities. In the
preface to Samson Agonistes Milton lays emphasis on the paradoxical aspect
of katharsis that, though implicit in Aristotle’s theory, is rather muted.
The poet comments that a sickness and its cure are one and the same,
thanks to the kindly intervention of nature. But on closer inspection
nature’s model reveals, as well as conceals, the warring doubles of tragedy,
who can be discerned in the works of Milton and, to some extent, in all
true dramatic poets:

Tragedy, as it was anciently compos’d, hath been ever held the gravest, moral-
est and most profitable of all other Poems: therefore said by Aristotle to be of
power by raising pity and fear, or terror, to purge the mind of those and such
like passions, that is to temper and reduce them to just measure with a kind of
delight, stirr’d up by reading or seeing those passions well imitated. Nor is
Nature wanting in her own effects to make good his assertion; for so in Physic
things of melancholic hue and quality are us’d against melancholy, sowr
against sowr, salt to remove salt humours.

It is, of course, essential that we refrain from forcing all arguments of
the Plato-versus-Aristotle type into the uniform mold of moralistic mod-
ernism; we must resist that dangerous craving for differences that prompts
us rigidly to grade and categorize art, philosophy, politics.

On the other hand, we must not forget that any significant attitude can
be transmuted into a ritual. The Plato-versus-Aristotle conflict is no
exception; we have only to recall those neighboring communities whose
ritual systems reflected antithetical solutions to identical problems—those
communities, for example, in which incest is regarded with horror and
loathing, and those in which it is an accepted ritualistic practice. We can
compare Plato’s attitude to those ritual systems that regard the evil aspects
of nature as inexorably evil and do their best to eliminate all trace of them
from the community. Plato found it impossible to believe that tragic dis-
cord or tragic violence could ever become synonyms for harmony and
peace. That is why he rejects with horror those patricidal and incestuous
impulses to which Aristotle (and Western culture in general, not exclud-
ing the psychoanalysts) assigned a certain “cultural value.” In our own
day the Dionysiac orgy is simply another form of academicism. The most
daring provocations and the most shocking scandals have lost all power to
provoke and shock. That does not mean that violence is no longer a
threat; quite the contrary. The sacrificial system is virtually worn out, and
that is why its inner workings are now exposed to view.

Whenever we think that a stable opposition or a stable difference has
been established, we discover that the situation has simply been inverted.
The Platonic rejection of tragic violence is itself violent, for it finds expres-
sion in a new expulsion—that of the poet. Through his very castigation of
the poet Plato reveals himself the poet’s “enemy brother,” his “double,”
who, like all true doubles, is oblivious to the relationship. As regards
Socrates, whom the community—unwilling to soil its hands by contact
with an impious creature—asked to do away with himself, Plato’s
sympathy is every bit as suspect as Sophocles’ sympathy for his pharma-
kos-hero. Whenever a people has embarked on a tragic course (and this
was as true for classical Greece as it is for us today), no heroes arise; only
antiheroes. The community, to which everyone in turn adheres in oppos-
ition to the enemy of the moment, is betrayed by all, just as Thebes was
betrayed by Oedipus and Tiresias. Ultimately it is this antagonism that
causes the community’s death, even (or rather, especially) when its
defense or its so-called best interests serve to disguise and excuse the
unleashed violence.

Tragedy holds up a mirror to mankind, and what men saw reflected in
it—the inexorable decay of the polis—prompted them to smash it, useless
and vain though that gesture might be. Staring back at these double
images, we can appreciate the context in which tragedy took place. After
all, the same mocking images glitter before our own eyes today.

Philosophy, like tragedy, can at certain levels serve as an attempt at
expulsion, an attempt perpetually renewed because never wholly success-
ful. This point, I think, has been brilliantly demonstrated by Jacques
Derrida in his essay “La Pharmacie de Platon.”® He sets out to analyze
Plato’s use of the term pharmakon. The Platonic pharmakon functions like
the human pharmakos and leads to similar results. The word is a pivot
point between sophistic deception and sound philosophy, even though its
role is no more justified or justifiable than the violence inflicted on the
human scapegoat led through the streets of fair Athens just prior to his
execution. When Plato applies pharmakon to the Sophists, he generally
uses it in its maleficent sense of “poison.” When it is applied to Socrates or
any Socratic activity, however, it means “remedy.” Although Derrida
refuses to do away with all differences or to treat these differences as null
and void, he demonstrates that between Socrates and the Sophists, the
structure of the opposition belies not the difference that Plato would like
to establish but rather the reciprocity that is suggested by the recourse to
one and the same word. All difference in doctrines and attitudes is dis-
solved in violent reciprocity, is secretly undermined by the symmetry of
the facts and by the strangely revealing, even somewhat naive use of
pharmakon. This use polarizes the maleficent violence on a double, who is
arbitrarily expelled from the philosophic community. From Plato right
down to Nietzsche (who took a contrary stand), the philosophic tradition
has piously reaffirmed this absolute difference. With Nietzsche the differ-
ence was inverted and began to shift back and forth—in preparation,
perhaps, for its predestined elimination.

Plato’s pharmakon is like Aristotle’s katharsis. And whatever their philo-
sophic intentions may have been, it was their literary intuition that led
these two men to select terms that seem suggestive but the full pertinence
of which may have escaped them. In both cases the metaphor is used
“innocently,” in the sense that the misapprehension that characterizes all
sacrificial ceremonies is innocent. In discovering, as we believe we have
done, that these metaphors and their respective objects conceal the same
process, we have in effect discovered that the metaphoric displacement
ultimately alters nothing. Behind the various metaphors a scapegoat
effect can always be discerned.

Derrida’s analysis demonstrates in striking fashion a certain arbitrary
violence of the philosophic process as it occurs in Plato, through the medi-
ation of a word that is indeed appropriate since it really designates an
earlier, more brutal variant of the same arbitrary violence. The long line of
sacrificial forms, each derived from the other, contains no “right” form
from the point of view of philosophy, sociology, or psychoanalysis. But it
does contain one genuine, unique event whose essence is invariably
betrayed, to one degree or another, by all the translations and metaphoric
derivations that Western thought has produced.

Derrida proves that translations of Plato in modern languages manage
to obliterate still further the final traces of the generative operation. For
the translations destroy the unity of the term pharmakon; they use entirely
different words to render pharmakon-remedy and pharmakon-poison. This
same process of obliteration was discussed in connection with Benveniste’s
Dictionnaire des institutions indo-européennes.

In the course of this work I have tried to demonstrate that generative
violence penetrates all forms of mythology and ritual. Yet by Chapter 8,
which discussed Freud’s Totem and Taboo, it was clear that the scope of this
inquiry would have to be extended. For if the mechanism of the surrogate
victim is simply another aspect of the original mechanism of the symbolic
process, then there can be nothing in the whole range of human culture
that is not rooted in violent unanimity—nothing that does not find its
source in the surrogate victim. That realization led me to turn my atten-
tion to various cultural activities derived from ritual. It is now time to
enlarge the theory in response to the previous findings.

We are now moving toward an expanded concept of sacrifice in which
the sacrificial act in the narrow sense plays only a minor part. If I wish
to show that this enlargement of my theory is not arbitrary, I must
demonstrate that in those localities where ritual killing no longer occurs,
or where there is no evidence of its ever having occurred, its place has
been taken by another institution also directly linked to generative vio-
lence. I have in mind a society like our own or one belonging to late
antiquity.

In Chapter 1, I suggested that there was a direct correlation between the
elimination of sacrificial practices and the establishment of a judicial sys-
tem. That discussion, however, preceded the discovery of the surrogate
victim. Consequently, it was not firmly rooted in generative unanimity
and now appears inconclusive.

We must endeavor to fill this breach. For if it cannot be proven that the
penal system owes its origins to generative violence, it might well be
maintained that the judicial system is based on rational agreement, on a
sort of social contract, and that men are indeed able to master their social
environment in the direct and explicit way that rationalists conceive.
Such a conclusion would flatly contradict my line of argument.

Louis Gernet takes up the subject of capital punishment in his
Anthropologie de la Gréce antique. In his discussion the link between pun-
ishment and the surrogate victim can be readily discerned. Capital pun-
ishment takes two seemingly separate forms, the first purely religious and
the second purely secular. In the first instance:

The death penalty is a means of eliminating pollution. ... It purifies the
affected group, who are often partly or wholly absolved of responsibility for the
newly spilt blood (this is true, at any rate, in the case of lapidation). The violent
expulsion, the expulsion unto death of the unworthy or accursed individual,
has an ancillary sense: that of devotio. Indeed, the killing seems in one sense to
be an act of piety. It makes us think of those ancient ordinances which declare
that the murder of an outlaw does not cause pollution, or of that prescription
of Germanic law that makes such killing a civic duty. ... Then, too, the victim
himself fills a true religious function, a function parallel to the priest-kings who
are also put to death. The religious function can be seen in the Latin term for
these victims: homo sacer; as well as in the Greek term pharmakos.
There is no doubt that the death penalty is portrayed here as a direct
extension of generative violence.

Gernet also makes reference to another form of punishment, the public
exposure of criminals. The exposure was sometimes accompanied by a
procession through the streets of the community. Gernet cites Georges
Glotz, who compares this procession to katharma rites and links it to
Plato’s suggestion that in his model state “criminals should be publically
displayed . . . at the frontiers of the country” (Laws 855c). Glotz considers
this mention of frontiers significant; his reasons lead us back to our own
preoccupation with the surrogate victim and its by-products: “One of the
tendencies that manifests itself in religious approaches to punishment is
that of elimination, and more particularly—for the word must be taken in
its etymological sense—of expulsion beyond the frontiers. The bones of
the sacrilegious dead are cast out of the community, and—this is a well-
known religious practice mentioned by Plato—the inanimate object that
caused a man’s death, or the corpse of an animal that killed a person, is
also subject to expulsion.””°

The second type of capital punishment was accomplished with the min-
imum of formalities and is devoid of religious connotations. It is an
apagoge; its rough and ready character might remind us of the frontier
“justice” of American Westerns. According to Gernet, it was usually
visited on criminals who had been caught in the act, and it was always
ratified by the common accord of the community. However, says Gernet,
the public nature of these acts would not have been enough to make the
execution of the criminals possible if these criminals had not usually been
foreigners; that is, individuals whose death entailed no risk of endless
revenge within the community.

The second type of capital punishment is very different from the first in
form—or rather, in lack of form. Nevertheless, the two are related. If we
acknowledge the role of the surrogate victim in the genesis of religious
forms, we cannot regard them as independent institutions. Generative
unanimity operates in both cases. In the first type it perpetrates capital
punishment by means of ritual; in the second type generative unanimity
makes an actual appearance—admittedly in diluted and degenerate form
(otherwise its appearance would not be possible), but savagely and spon-
taneously nonetheless. This latter mode of unanimity gradually evolves
into what can perhaps be described as an institutionalized and legalized
form of mob violence.

In neither case can the concept of legal punishment be divorced from its
original impulse. The concept can be traced back to spontaneous unanim-
ity, to the irresistible conviction that compels an entire community to vent
its fury on a single individual. Legal punishment thus has an aleatory
character readily recognizable in the numerous intermediary forms
between the religious and judicial spheres, notably in the case of the
“ordeal” (by fire, water, single combat, etc.).

As we bring together the various elements of our discussion, only one
conclusion seems possible. There is a unity that underlies not only all
mythologies and rituals but the whole of human culture, and this unity of
unities depends on a single mechanism, continually functioning because
perpetually misunderstood—the mechanism that assures the com-
munity’s spontaneous and unanimous outburst of opposition to the
surrogate victim.

Such a conclusion may strike some as extreme, not to say extravagant.
It might well be useful at this point to review the analytical approach on
which it is based. We need one more example—an example that will
demonstrate the unity of all sacrificial rites as well as the continuity from
these rites to other cultural phenomena that seem, at first glance, utterly
alien to them. I have attempted to choose an example that appears essen-
tial to the structure of human society: the institution of monarchy—
monarchy as it pertains to sovereigns as well as to political power in
general and to the whole idea of central authority.

The discussion of African monarchies has already shown that isolating
ritual incest, the most “sensational aspect of those monarchies, can only
lead us astray. We cannot treat ritual incest as an independent phenom-
enon but must keep our sights fixed on the sacrifice, even if the sacrificial
rites seem dull and ordinary in comparison with ritual incest.

Sacrifice is the most crucial and fundamental of rites; it is also the most
commonplace, and that is why it sometimes changes form or disappears in
the course of the evolution of any given ceremony. So ritual forms are
mutilated even before they reach those modern interpreters usually eager
to further minimize, disregard, and efface the last traces of generative
violence.

The more peculiar a cultural element appears and the more distinctive
its character, the more it tends to distract us from essentials, unless we
take care to place it in its proper context. It is the commonplace that truly
deserves our attention, for the most frequently encountered cultural
elements are the ones most likely to lead us to the truth.

We have already seen how two variants of the same ritual can stand in
opposition; for example, the festival and what I have called the antifesti-
val, or the requiring and prohibition of royal incest. Such oppositions stem
from different interpretations of the sacrificial crisis. Even if the rite takes
into account the basic connection between maleficent and beneficent vio-
lence, it still attempts to establish differences between them for practical
purposes—differences that can never be anything but arbitrary, since the
beneficial reversal only occurs as a result of the maleficent paroxysm and
is in a sense produced by it.

We have also observed that the striking variation among rites in any
given geographical area is far less important than it seems at first glance.
One has no right to find great significance in one tribe’s prescription of
royal incest and a neighboring tribe’s proscription of it, or to conclude
from this difference that one tribe is more timid and fearful, the other
more daring and “liberated.”

The same principle holds true for broad categories of rites; their auton-
omy is only an illusion. The inability of religious thought to understand
correctly the violent mechanism of its own genesis gives rise to countless
interpretations that can all be different from each other because they are
all erroneous; these interpretations are the rituals and myths of all human
societies the world over.

It does not seem to have occurred to modern theorists, bound as they
are to their own methodologies, to draw together such disparate institu-
tions as the African monarchies, the cannibalistic rites of the Tupinamba,
and the sacrificial ceremonies of the Aztecs. However, each of these
institutions casts light on the other.

In the Aztec rites a certain time elapses between the election of the
victim and his execution. During this time every effort is made to gratify
his desires. The people prostrate themselves before him, fight for the priv-
ilege of touching his garments. He is treated like a king, almost like a god.
Yet this reverential treatment ends in brutal murder.

The Tupinamba prisoner shares certain similarities with the Aztec
victim and the African king. In each case the victim’s situation combines
grandeur and misery, veneration and ignominy. There is the same com-
bination of positive and negative elements, though in somewhat different
proportions.

These analogies are too limited and vague, however, to constitute a
solid basis for comparison. For instance, the ephemeral honors accorded
the Aztec victim cannot really be compared to the solid political power
enjoyed by the African king. As for the Tupinamba prisoner, it would be
stretching a point to call his position “regal.” Our attempt to bring these
three cases together may seem all the more audacious when one considers
that their similarities, even when clearly distinguishable, have nothing to
do with the most conspicuous features of each institution: ritual incest for
the African kings, cannibalism for the Tupinamba, human sacrifice for the
Aztecs. These are notable ethnological landmarks, and my treatment of
them might well seem sheer willfulness and impressionism, a reversion to
the methods of Frazer or Robertson Smith—even though, in this instance,
the synchronic groupings established by modern scholars working in the
field have been taken into consideration.

At this point the prudent ethnographer might think it is advisable to
hold fast the doctrine that a king is a king and a victim is a victim, in the
same way that a cat is indubitably a cat. That some kings are sacrificed
and some victims are treated like kings is interesting, but nothing more;
an amusing paradox that can be exploited by literary folk but that has
nothing to do with science.

So prudent an attitude may not be very satisfying, but in the absence of
any unifying theory it remains unavoidable. However, everything
changes once we begin to realize that the various “scapegoat” phenomena
are not the reflection of some ill-articulated guilt complex, but rather the
very basis of cultural unification, the source of all rituals and religion.
Seen in this light, the differences between these three ritual institutions
do not appear so great; they should not be assimilated to the sort of differ-
ence that separates carbon monoxide and sodium sulfate. The differences
are due to the three different ways in which three societies look at the
same process: the loss and subsequent recovery of social unity. We
can now furnish explanations for the strange privileges accorded the
Tupinamba prisoner and the ephemeral adoration offered the Aztec victim;
and we can also glimpse the meaning of the shape of these rites and
reaffirm their fundamental unity.

If my analysis still leaves the reader skeptical, if he is still troubled by the
differences between the three rituals, we can show that many intermedi-
ary ritual forms exist that cast doubt upon the apparent specificity of the
forms most distant from each other. Many societies have kings, but it isno
longer the king who is the sacrificial victim. Nor is it an animal. The victim
is a human being who stands in for the king; he is often chosen from a
category of criminals, social misfits, or classless creatures like the Greek
pharmakos. Before replacing the real king on the sacrificial altar, the mock
king replaces him briefly on the throne. The brevity of the reign, its lack of
any real power, recalls the Aztec rite, but the general context is that of true
monarchy. At this point the difference between the African king and the
Aztec victim begins to blur, for we have here a victim who belongs as much
to one rite as to the other, a victim who is exactly situated between the two.

On the other hand, it should be noted that the mock king reigns over a
festival that is brought to a proper sacrificial conclusion by his own death.
The theme of festival and the theme of sacrifice of a true or simulated king
are closely associated—for instance, in the Swazi Incwala—and this is
hardly surprising, for the festival is nothing more than a reenactment of
the sacrificial crisis, or rather of its resolution by means of the surrogate
victim. Whenever the restoration of unity is personally attributed to the
surrogate victim, he is seen as “divine,” “royal,” “sovereign.” The words
used to designate him—king, sovereign, divinity, scapegoat—are nothing
more than metaphors used in conjunction with other metaphors. Their
purpose is to recapture the original act of generative unanimity, and they
are all different because they never entirely succeed.

In any ritual interpretation of the primordial event there is always one
dominant element that overshadows the others and finally obscures them
as the memory of the generative violence fades from the collective con-
sciousness. In the festival this dominant element is the joyous celebration
of a partially transformed sacrificial crisis. In time, as we have seen, the
concluding sacrifice is eliminated, as are the rites of exorcism that accom-
pany the sacrifice or replace it. When all vestiges of the generative vio-
lence have been removed, we are left with a “festival” in the modern
sense. This is the only kind of festival familiar to the cultural historian and
recognizable by him, yet he must understand its ritual origins in order to
understand its evolution.

The greater vitality these rites possess and the closer they are to their
common origin, the more futile becomes any attempt at classification. Of
course, difference pervaded these rites from the beginning, for the princi-
pal function of the surrogate victim is to restore and solidify difference;
but at the outset, differentiation remains circumscribed and limited; it has
not yet begun to proliferate.

The rite constitutes the original interpretation of the generative vio-
lence. It sets up an initial imbalance between the reciprocal aspects of the
sacred, between the maleficent and beneficent elements. With the passage
of time this imbalance becomes greater and greater; the feature that was
originally given prominence relegates all the other features to the back-
ground and finally banishes them altogether. At this point the rational
viewer might well conclude that any connection between the maleficent
and the beneficent elements is a logical contradiction and, therefore,
unworthy of consideration. A choice, it seems, must be made between the
“accented” and “unaccented” elements; the continued impoverishment of
the latter prompts the rational observer to dismiss them as superfluous
appendages introduced into the rite by mistake. Wherever contradictions
still exist, reason insists that we do away with them. The moment comes
when we find ourselves confronting two institutions that appear wholly
unrelated. The whole thrust of Western thought, with its insistence on
differences, prevents us from perceiving their fundamental unity. So
firmly entrenched is this habit of thought that this effort to uncover the
common origins of all rites will be misunderstood by many people as my
own inability to differentiate between them.

Royal incest is not truly essential to the African concept of monarchy,
either from the point of view of origins, in which it is subordinated to
sacrifice, or from the point of view of evolution, of passage into the
“monarchal institution.” What is essential is the granting of authority
during his lifetime to someone who is designated as a future victim and
who draws his power and prestige retroactively from the reconciling
power of the original scapegoat. With the passage of time the substitute
victim’s authority becomes more durable, more stable; the factors oppos-
ing it lose their importance, and another victim, human or animal, is
substituted for the king. Everything that has to do with the reverse side of
supreme authority—wrongdoing and humiliation, maleficent violence
and sacrificial punishment—becomes merely “symbolic” and soon disap-
pears from view. The vestiges of ritual are like traces of chrysalis clinging
to an insect; they are soon discarded. Sacred royalty is transformed into
royalty pure and simple, into political power.

When we consider the monarchy of the Ancien Régime in France or
any other traditional monarchic system, we cannot help wondering
whether it would not be more profitable to consider these institutions in
the light of sacred kingship than in the light of modern ideas about mon-
archy. The concept of Divine Right is not just a fiction made up on the
spur of the moment to keep the king’s subjects in line. The life and death
of the monarchic concept in France—its sacred rites, its fools, its cure of
scrofula through the royal touch, the grand finale of the guillotine—all
this is clearly structured by the influence of sacred violence. The sacred
character of the king—that is, his identity with the victim—regains its
potency as it is obscured from view and even held up to ridicule. It is in
fact then that the king is most threatened.

The master of these paradoxes, the most daringly perspicacious inter-
preter of the monarchic principle in a world not so far removed from our
own, is Shakespeare. He bridges the gap between the most primitive
concepts of kingship and the most modern; he seems to have been better
acquainted with both than we are with either.

The dethronement scene in Richard II can be seen as a sort of coronation
performed in reverse. Walter Pater described it as an inverted rite,"! but all
rites demand that moment of inversion. The king acts as his own sacri-
ficer, transforming himself by quasi-religious means into a double of all
his enemies and their surrogate victims as well. He is himself a traitor, in
no way different from those who do him violence:

Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see;

But they can see a sort of traitors here.

Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,

I find myself a traitor with the rest;

For I have given here my soul’s consent

T’undeck the pompous body of a king. . . .(5.1.244)

In his study of the duality of the king’s person as portrayed in legal
documents of the Middle Ages, The King’s Two Bodies, Ermst Kantorowicz
undertakes an analysis of Richard H. Although he does not touch directly
upon the question of the surrogate victim, he gives an excellent description
of the dual nature of the Shakespearean monarch:

The duplications, all one, and all simultaneously active, in Richard—Thus play I
in one person many people (5.5. 31)—are those potentially present in the King,
the Fool and the God. They dissolve, perforce, in the Mirror. Those three proto-
types of “twin-birth” intersect and overlap and interfere with each other con-
tinuously. Yet, it may be felt that the “King” dominates in the scene on the
Coast of Wales (3.11), the “Fool” at Flint Castle (3.111), and the “God” in the
Westminster scene (4.1) with Man’s wretchedness as a perpetual companion
and antithesis at every stage. Moreover, in each one of those three scenes we
encounter the same cascading: from divine kingship to kingship’s “Name” and
from the name to the naked misery of man.'?

We may go a little further and ask ourselves whether this description
does not transcend the subject of monarchy strictly conceived to embrace
broader concepts of sovereignty and, indeed, all forms of central power
that owe their existence to the surrogate victim. There are perhaps two
fundamental types of society, which overlap to some extent: those having
a central authority essentially monarchal in character and those having
no such authority, disclosing no trace of generative violence in their polit-
ical institutions—the so-called dual systems. The first group, for reasons
unknown to us, tends to cluster around a single representative of the
original victim, an individual whose status is more or less permanent, who
concentrates political as well as religious power in himself. Even if this
power is subsequently fragmented, the tendency toward centralism
persists.

It is worth noting that structuralist ethnology shows little interest in
those societies that no longer reveal any significant opposition between
dual forces. In this instance the opposition between the two “extremes”
has been interiorized. It can indeed find exterior expression—in the con-
flict between king and fool, for example—but this always seems like an
afterthought, a development of secondary importance.

The unstable character of “historical” societies is perhaps reflected in
this “royal” interiorization in each one of us, this play of differences,
undifferentiation, and scapegoating in each one of us, which encourages
tragedians to treat the surrogate king like the prototype of human beings
caught up in a constant state of crisis and plagued by an unending vacilla-
tion of differences.

All religious rituals spring from the surrogate victim, and all the great
institutions of mankind, both secular and religious, spring from ritual.
Such is the case, as we have seen, with political power, legal institutions,
medicine, the theater, philosophy and anthropology itself. It could hardly
be otherwise, for the working basis of human thought, the process of
“symbolization,” is rooted in the surrogate victim. Even if no example
taken alone offers conclusive proof of my theory, their cumulative effect is
overwhelming; all the more so because they coincide with archetypal
myths that tell, in apparently “naive” fashion, how all man’s religious,
familial, economic, and social institutions grew out of the body of an
original victim. The surrogate victim, as founder of the rite, appears as the
ideal educator of humanity, in the etymological sense of educatio, a lead-
ing out. The rite gradually leads men away from the sacred; it permits
them to escape their own violence, removes them from violence, and
bestows on them all the institutions and beliefs that define their humanity.

In the great Indian texts dealing with sacrifice we discover the same
content, though in slightly different form, as in the origin myths:

In the beginning the gods sacrificed a man; when he was killed, his ritualistic
virtues deserted him. They entered a horse; the gods sacrificed the horse; when
it was killed, its ritualistic virtues deserted it. They entered a cow; the gods
sacrificed the cow; when it was killed, its ritualistic virtues deserted it. They
entered a sheep; the gods sacrificed the sheep; when it was killed, its ritualistic
virtues deserted it. They entered a goat; the gods sacrificed the goat. When it
was killed, its ritualistic virtues deserted it and entered the earth. The gods dug
for them, and found them in the form of rice and barley. And that is why today
we still dig the earth to procure rice and barley.”

Durkheim asserts that society is of a piece, and that the primary unify-
ing factor is religion. His statement is not a truism, nor does it dissolve
religion in social institutions. Durkheim believes that men are shaped
culturally by an educational process that belongs to the sphere of
religion. Even concepts of space and time, he says stem from religion.
Durkheim never fully articulated his insight, for he never realized what a
formidable obstacle violence presents and what a positive resource it
becomes when it is transfigured and reconverted through the mediation
of scapegoat effects.

Human society does not begin with the fear of the “slave” for the
“master,” as Hegel claims, but—as Durkheim maintains—with religion. To
carry Durkheim’s insight to its conclusion, I will add that religion is simply
another term for the surrogate victim, who reconciles mimetic opposi-
tions and assigns a sacrificial goal to the mimetic impulse. At the moment
when differentiated unity is urgently needed and apparently impossible to
obtain—that is, during an outburst of reciprocal violence—the surrogate
victim comes to the rescue.

The role of the surrogate victim can be ascertained, I believe, even on a
spatial plane. There is good reason to think that it has imposed its image
on the very structures of some communities, at those special locations
forming the center of the community, sites generally dedicated to the
spirit of collective unity and whose true nature is sometimes brought to
light through archaeological investigation.

In Greece these sites include the tombs of heroes, the omphalos, the
stone of the agora and, finally, that perfect symbol of the polis, Hestia, the
common hearth. Louis Gernet’s essay on these sites leaves this reader at
least with the overwhelming conviction that these are places where the
surrogate victim met his death or where he was believed to have died.

The traditions attached to these localities and the ritualistic functions
associated with them lend credence to the theory that sacred mob
violence formed the origin of the polis. This mob violence can take the
form of the Bouphonia, which we have referred to on several occasions;
or it can take the form of the public exposure of criminals, or other pun-
ishments that recall the pharmakos. Further research along the lines of
the surrogate victim would undoubtedly turn up even more conclusive
evidence.

There is reason to believe that these symbolic sites of unification gave
birth to all religious forms; it was there that the various cults were estab-
lished, spatial relationships fixed, the clock of history set in motion, and
the beginnings of a social life plotted out precisely as Durkheim
envisioned it. There everything begins; from there everything emanates;
there everything returns when discord breaks out. Surely that is the point
of the only direct quotation we have of Anaximander, “the earliest voice
of Western thought.” I would like to repeat those astonishing words here,
to show that such a claim is not unbelievable.

In the evolution from ritual to secular institutions men gradually
draw away from violence and eventually lose sight of it; but an actual
break with violence never takes place. That is why violence can always
stage a stunning, catastrophic comeback. The possibility of such an
occurrence conforms to the dire predictions of divine vengeance that are
to be found in every religious system. His rejection of this apocalyptic
message explains why Heidegger has rejected the traditional translation of
Anaximander’s words. But it seems to me that he has missed the point
completely; for the vengeance Anaximander alludes to is wholly human,
not divine; in other words, not mythic. I shall revert, therefore, to the
more traditional translation of Anaximander, which Heidegger went out
of his way to criticize but which seems to me marvelously apposite:

Where things are born, there too must they perish; for each in turn metes out
punishment and expiation for its wickedness, each in the allotted time."

Notes

1 I will discuss only those aspects of the Tupinamba rituals that bear directly on
my argument. For further information on these practices, see Alfred
Métraux, Religions et magies indiennes d’Amérique du Sud (Paris 1967),
pp. 43-79.

2 Francis Huxley, Affable Savages (New York, 1966), p. 254.

3 Mircea Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane (New York, 1961), p. 103.

4 Huxley, Affable Savages, p. 242.

5 Victor Turner, The Drums of Affliction (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968), p. 269.

6 William Arrowsmith, “The Criticism of Greek Tragedy,” Tulane Drama Review
3 no. 3 (1959).

7 The methods whereby the humanistic tradition, both ancient and modern,
has managed to minimize and at times suppress the more horrific aspects of
archaic and classical Greek culture surely deserve close study. As Henri
Jeanmaire has observed (Dionysos, pp. 228-30):

The fact that this horrific aspect is only rarely alluded to by ancient
authors is not wholly fortuitous. It is to the great glory of the Greeks that
their particular concept of religion and the gods, as manifested primarily
in their literature, art, and philosophy, served as a bulwark against that
ancient fund of cruelty inherent in most religions whose origins are sunk
deep in the past. Those many myths that pertain all too clearly to human
sacrifice (myths generally involving children or young girls) suffice to
remind us of the hard reality of these barbarous antecedents. But there is
no concealing the fact that, as soon as one strays some slight distance
from the main cultural centers, traces of these practices could be found,
usually in the form of local customs or traditional rituals. Sheer familiar-
ity, a lingering sense of shame, ignorance of what was going on in other
regions, and a reluctance to refer to matters that contradicted the
accepted ideal of Hellenism all combined to cast these events into
shadow. The brutal treatment accorded the pharmakoi, poor creatures
used as scapegoats, had been greatly reduced in ferocity by the time of
Pericles and Socrates and transformed into a sort of old popular custom.
Nonetheless, it could be assumed that things had once been quite differ-
ent, and on the frontiers of Hellenism, at Marseilles or Abdera, one could
still hear tell of pharmakoi being hurled into the sea or stoned to death.

Trustworthy witnesses testify that as late as the fourth century
religious ceremonies on Mount Lyceum in Arcadia included acts of ritual
cannibalism involving the eating of an infant’s flesh.

Such considerations can hardly do more than touch upon what is,
after all, a very complex problem, but they should serve as a warning not
to take too lightly the information contained in certain Christian tracts,
even though these accounts were written long after the event and
derived from the writings of local scholars who, like the later Christian
polemicists, were also voicing their aversion to blood sacrifice. The
accounts agree that human sacrifices were made to Dionysus.
Human sacrifices to Zeus were made at Lyctos. And it is interesting to
note that Themistocles, on the eve of Salamis, is said to have sacrificed
two young Persians to Dionysus at an inland site on the urging of a
soothsayer. The authenticity of this account is questionable because it is
recorded so late; and Herodotus’ silence hardly adds to its credibility. Yet
the author of this story was well placed to inform himself on local
history, and Herodotus’ reticence may in this case have been deliberate.
It is not the least paradoxical aspect of our subject—the traces of archa-
ism in the various cults of Dionysus—that even so abbreviated a treat-
ment as the one offered here can provide a useful introduction to the
circumstances that earned our god (who had already acquired so many
attributes and assumed so many different forms, although some of them
are more closely connected than has sometimes been thought) the great
good fortune of becoming the patron god of the Athenian theater and
subsequently, during the Hellenistic period, of the theater as a whole.

8 Jacques Derrida, “La Pharmacie de Platon,” in La Dissémination (Paris, 1972),
pp. 71-197.

9 Louis Gernet, “Sur l’exécution capitale,” in Anthropologie de la Gréce antique
(Paris, 1968), pp. 326-27.

10 G. Glotz, “Solidarité de la famille dans le droit criminel,” p. 25. Cited in
Gernet, “Quelques rapports entre la pénalité et la religion dans la Gréce
ancienne,” Anthropologie de la Gréce antique, pp. 289-90.

11 Walter Pater, Appreciations (London, 1957), p. 205.

12 Ernst Kantorowicz. The King’s Two Bodies (Princeton, 1957), p. 27.

13 Gatapatha-Brahmana, 1, 2, 3, 6-7, in Sylvain Lévi, La Doctrine du sacrifice dans
les Brahmanas (Paris, 1966), pp. 136-37.

14 Cf. Heidegger, “The Anaximander Fragment,” in Early Greek Thinking, trans.
David Farrell Krell and Frank A. Capuzzi (New York, 1975).


Conclusion



A theory of the nature of primitive religion has emerged from the fore-
going inquiry into the origins of myth and ritual. No attempt will be made
here to consider the Judaeo-Christian texts in the light of this theory, or
vice versa; that must be left to a future study. However, I hope to have
suggested here the course that such a project might take.

My theory depends on a number of basic premises. Even if innumerable
intermediary stages exist between the spontaneous outbursts of violence
and its religious imitations, even if it is only these imitations that come to
our notice, I want to stress that these imitations had their origin in a real
event. The actuality of this event, over and above its existence in rite and
record, must be kept in mind. We must also take care not to restrict this
event to any one context, any one dominant intellectual framework,
whether semantic or symbolic, which lacks a firm basis in reality. The
event should be viewed as an absolute beginning, signifying the passage
from nonhuman to human, as well as a relative beginning for the societies
in question.

The theory of the surrogate victim is paradoxical in that it is based on
facts whose empirical characteristics are not directly accessible. These facts
can be drawn exclusively from texts that invariably offer distorted, frag-
mentary, or indirect testimony. We can only gain access to the generative
event through constant reference to these enigmatic sources, which con-
stitute at once the foreground in which our theory situates itself and the
background against which its accuracy must be tested.

The theory of evolution depends on the comparison and linkage of
evidence—the fossil remains of living creatures—corresponding, in the
case of my hypothesis, to religious and cultural texts. No single anatomical
fact studied in isolation can lead to the concept of evolution. No direct
observation is possible, no form of empirical verification even conceiv-
able, because evolution occurred over a span of time entirely out of scale
with the span of human existence.

In the same way no single text—mythic, religious, or tragic—will yield
the operating procedures of violent unanimity. Here, too, the comparative
method is the only one possible. If this method has not been successful to
date, that is because there are so many variables at work; it is hard to
locate the single underlying scheme that controls them all. The theory of
evolution, too, constitutes a hypothesis.

The surrogate victim theory presents, as a theory, a distinct superiority
over the theory of evolution. The inaccessible character of the generative
event is not merely an obstacle unrelated to the theory, an aspect that
contributes nothing of positive value; rather, it is an essential part of that
theory, something we cannot do without. In order to retain its structuring
influence the generative violence must remain hidden; misapprehension
is indispensable to all religious or postreligious structuring. And the hid-
den nature of the event corresponds to the researchers’ inability to attrib-
ute a satisfactory function to religious practices. My theory is the first to
offer an explanation of the primordial role that religion plays in primitive
societies, as well as of man’s ignorance of this role.

This hidden nature is much less problematic than a notion like the
unconscious of Freud. A comparison of certain myths and rituals, viewed
in the light of Greek tragedy, leads to the theory of the surrogate victim
and violent unanimity through a path much more direct than that of
“verbal slips” to such psychoanalytic concepts as suppressed desires and
the unconscious. Surely such slips can be attributed to many different
causes. But the surrogate victim theory is the only hypothesis that
accounts for all features of the cultural phenomena presented here.
Unlike the psychoanalytical explanations, it leaves no areas in shadow
and neglects no major aspects.

Although generative violence is invisible, it can logically be deduced
from myths and rituals once their real structures have been perceived.
The further one advances along this path and the more transparent the
true nature of religious thought appears, the clearer it becomes that there
is nothing here to suppress or to hide. There is no justification for the idea
that religious thought either represses or deliberately refuses to acknow-
ledge a threatening self-awareness. Such awareness does not yet present
any threat to religion. It is we who are threatened by it, we who flee
from it.

If religious misapprehensions were to be regarded in the same light as
psychoanalysis regards its material, we should require some religious
equivalent to the Freudian repression of the patricide/incest desire; some-
thing that must be hidden and kept hidden. Yet such is hardly the case. To
be sure, there are many details of the generative event that have dropped
out, many elements that have become so warped, misshapen, and trans-
figured as to be unrecognizable when reproduced in mythical or ritualistic
form. Yet no matter how gaping the lacunae may appear, no matter how
grotesque the deformations, they are not ultimately indispensable to the
religious attitude, the religious misapprehension. Even if it were brought
face to face with the inner workings of the mechanism, the religious mind
would be unable to conceive of the transformation of bad into good, of
violence into culture, as a spontaneous phenomenon calling for a positive
approach.

It is natural to assume that the best-concealed aspect of the generative
mechanism will be the most crucial element, the one most likely to render
the sacrificial system nonfunctional if it becomes known. This aspect will
be the arbitrary selection of the victim, its essential insignificance, which
contradicts the meaning accumulated upon its head by the scapegoat
projections.

Close examination will reveal that even this aspect is not really hidden;
it can be readily detected once we know what we must look for.
Frequently the rituals themselves are engineered so that they include an
element of chance in the choice of the victim, but mythologists have
never taken this into account.

Although we have already called attention to those rites designed to
give a role to chance in the selection of the victim, it may be that we have
not put sufficient stress on this essential aspect.

Sporting contests and games of chance appear to modern man most
incongruous as ritual practices. The Uitoto Indians, for example,
incorporate a balloon game into their ritual; and the Kayans of Borneo use
a top in the course of their religious ceremonies.

Even more remarkable, apparently even more incongruous, is the game
of dice that figures in the funeral rites of the Canelos Indians. Only the
men participate in this game. Divided into two rival groups and lined up
on either side of the deceased, they take turns casting their dice over the
corpse. The sacred spirit, in the person of the dead man, determines the
outcome of each throw. The winner is awarded one of the dead man’s
domestic animals, which is slaughtered on the spot, and the women
prepare a meal from it for the assembled moumers.

Jensen, in citing these facts, remarks that the games are not simply
additions to established religious practices.’ If one were to say that the
Canelos Indians “play at dice during the funeral rites of their parents,” one
would be conveying the wrong idea of the ceremonies. For this game
takes place only in conjunction with these funeral rites. It is modern man
who thinks of games of this sort as exclusively secular, and we must not
project that idea onto the Canelos Indians. This is not to say that our own
games have nothing to do with rites; in fact, they originate in rites. But, as
usual, we have got things reversed. For us, games of chance are a secular
activity upon which a religious meaning has been superimposed. The true
state of affairs is precisely the opposite: games originate in rites that have
been divested, to a greater or lesser degree, of their sacred character. As I
have already remarked, Huizinga’s famous theory of play should be
inverted. It is not play that envelops the sacred, but the sacred that
envelops the notion of play.

Death, like any passage, entails violence. The passage into the beyond
by a member of the community may provoke (among other difficulties)
quarrels among the survivors, for there is always the problem of how to
redistribute the dead man’s belongings. In order to meet the threat of
maleficent contagion the community must have recourse to the universal
model, to generative violence; it must attend to the advice of the sacred
itself. In this particular case, the community has perceived and retained
the role of chance in the liberating decision. If violence is given free play,
chance alone is responsible for the ultimate resolution of the conflict; and
the rite tries to force the hand of chance before violence has had the
opportunity to act. The rite aims straight at the final result, achieving, as it
were, a minimum expenditure of violence.

The Canelos dice game offers a clue to the reason why the theme of
chance recurs so frequently in folklore, myth, and fable. Oedipus, it will
be remembered, refers to himself as the son of Tyche—that is, Fortune or
Chance. There were towns in the ancient world in which the selection of
magistrates was made by drawing lots, for the power bestowed by ritually
regulated chance always contains a sacred element, the sacred “fusion of
opposites.” Indeed, the more we reflect on this theme of Chance, the
more universal it appears. In popular legend and fairy tale Chance is
often invoked to “find” kings or, conversely (and the converse is always
the other face of the same coin), to designate someone to undertake a
difficult or perilous mission, a mission that might involve self-sacrifice for
the general good—someone, in short, to assume the role of surrogate
victim:

On tira-t-a la courte paille
Pour savoir qui serait mangé.”

Yet is there any way of proving that the motif of Chance has its origin in
the arbitrary nature of the violent resolution? There are numerous
instances in which the drawing of lots so clearly supports the meaning
proposed here that it is virtually impossible to doubt the connection. One
such example is the Old Testament Book of Jonah. God tells Jonah to go
forth and warn the people of Nineveh that their city will be destroyed if
they do not repent of their ways. Hoping to evade this thankless task, the
reluctant prophet embarks on a ship sailing for Tarshish:

But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast
forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. But
Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.

So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O
sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we
perish not.

And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may
know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell
upon Jonah.

(Jonah 1:4—7)

The ship represents the community, the tempest the sacrificial crisis.
The jettisoned cargo is the cultural system that has abandoned its distinc-
tions. The fact that everybody calls out to his own particular god indicates
a breakdown in the religious order. The floundering ship can be compared
to the city of Nineveh, threatened with destruction unless its people
repent. The forms may vary, but the crisis is always the same.

The passengers cast lots to determine who is responsible for the crisis.
Chance can always be trusted to reveal the truth, for it reflects the will of
the divinity. The lot designates Jonah, who proceeds to confess his
culpability:

Then the men were exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou
done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the Lord,
because he had told them.

Then they said unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be
calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.

And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall
the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you.

(Jonah 1:10-12)

The sailors attempt to gain the shore by their own efforts; they would
like to save Jonah’s life. But they finally recognize the futility of their
efforts, and address themselves to the Lord—even though he is Jonah’s
Lord and not their own:

Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we
beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent
blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee.

So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea; and the sea ceased
from her raging.

Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the
Lord, and made vows.

(Jonah 1:14—16)

What we see here is a reflection of the sacrificial crisis and its resolution.
The victim is chosen by lot; his expulsion saves the community, as repre-
sented by the ship’s crew; and a new god is acknowledged through the
crew’s sacrifice to the Lord whom they did not know before. Taken in
isolation this story tells us little, but when seen against the backdrop of
our whole discussion, each detail acquires significance.

Modem man flatly rejects the notion that Chance is the reflection of
divine will. Primitive man views things differently. For him, Chance
embodies all the obvious characteristics of the sacred. Now it deals vio-
lently with man, now it showers him with gifts. Indeed, what is more
capricious in its favors than Chance, more susceptible to those rapid
reversals of temper that are invariably associated with the gods?

The sacred nature of Chance is reflected in the practice of the lottery. In
some sacrificial rites the choice of victim by means of a lottery serves to
underline the relationship between Chance and generative violence. In
an essay entitled “Sur le symbolisme politique: le Foyer commun,” Louis
Gernet cites a particularly revealing ritual, which took place in Cos during
a festival dedicated to Zeus:

The choice of victim was determined by a sort of lottery in which all the cattle,
which were originally presented separately by each division of each tribe, were
mixed together in a common herd. The animal ultimately selected was exe-
cuted on the following day, having first been “introduced to Hestia,” and
undergone various rites. Immediately prior to the ritual presentation, Hestia
herself receives homage in the form of an animal sacrifice.’

At the close of the previous chapter I noted that Hestia, the common
hearth, in all probability marked the place where the original act of com-
munal violence was perpetrated. It seems more than likely, therefore, that
the selection of the victim by lottery was meant to simulate that original
violence. The selection is not made by men, but left to divine Chance,
acting through violence. The mixing together of the cattle that had origin-
ally been identified by tribe or by division of tribe is particularly revealing.
This deliberate confusion of distinctions, this merger into a communal
togetherness, constitutes an obligatory preamble to the lottery; clearly it
was introduced to reproduce the exact order of the original events. The
arbitrary and violent resolution that serves as a model for the lottery takes
place at the very height of the sacrificial crisis, when the distinctions dele-
gated to the members of society by the cultural order succumb to the
reciprocal violence and are merged into a communal mass.

A traditional discussion of Dionysus involves a demonstration of how
he differs from Apollo or from the other gods. But is it not more urgent to
show how Dionysus and Apollo share the same characteristics, why the
one and the other should be called divine? Surely all the gods, despite
their differences, have something in common, something from which
all their distinctive qualities spring. Without such a common basis, the
differences become meaningless.

Scholars of religion devote themselves to the study of gods and divinity.
They should be able to provide clear and concise definitions of these con-
cepts, but they do not. They are obliged, of course, to decide what falls
within their field of study and what falls outside it; yet they leave the
crucial and most decisively scientific task of defining their subject to
uninformed public opinion. Even assuming that it is possible—or justifi-
able—to stretch the concept of divinity to include each and everybody’s
idea of the divine, the so-called science of religion can neither do without
this approach nor provide a convincing defense of it.

There is no true science of religion, any more than there is a science of
culture. Scholars are still disputing about which cult Greek tragedy should
be ascribed to. Were the ancients correct in assigning tragedy to Dionysus,
or does it rightfully belong to another god? Undoubtedly this is a genuine
problem; but it is also, I think, a secondary one. Far more important, but
far less discussed, is the relationship between tragedy and the divine,
between the theater in general and religion.

Whether my theory proves to be true or false, it can, I believe, lay
claim to being “scientific,” if only because it allows for a rigorous defin-
ition of such terms as divinity, ritual, rite, and religion. Any phenomenon
associated with the acts of remembering, commemorating, and perpetu-
ating a unanimity that springs from the murder of a surrogate victim
can be termed “religious.”

The surrogate victim theory avoids at once the impressionism of the
positivist approach and the arbitrary and “reductivist” schemata of psy-
choanalysis. Although this theory brings together many crucial aspects of
man’s experience, it offers no simple substitute for the “wondrous
profusion” of the world’s religious systems. Indeed, one ought perhaps to
ask whether this “profusion” is really as wondrous as all that; in any case,
the mechanism proposed here carries us beyond the mere cataloging of
characteristics. The endless diversity of myths and rituals derives from the
fact that they all seek to recollect and reproduce something they never
succeed in comprehending. There is only one generative event, only one
way to grasp its truth: by means of my hypothesis. On the other hand,
there are innumerable ways of missing it; hence the multiplicity of
religious systems. My thesis results from an eminently positive line of
inquiry. I have a certain confidence in language—contrary to some mod-
ern thinkers who, at the very moment when truth becomes accessible in
language, declare that language is incapable of expressing truth. This abso-
lute distrust of language, in a period of mythic dilapidation like our
own, may well serve the same purpose as the excessive confidence that
prevailed before the dilapidation, when no decisive truth was in sight.

Our theory should be approached, then, as one approaches any scientific hypothesis.
The reader must ask himself whether it actually takes into
account all the items it claims to cover; whether it enables him to assign
to primitive institutions an origin, function, and structure that cohere to
one another as well as to their overall context; whether it allows him to
organize and assess the vast accumulation of ethnological data, and to do
so in a truly economical manner, without recourse to “exceptions” and
“aberrations.” Above all, he must ask himself whether this theory applies
not in single, isolated instances but in every conceivable situation. Can he
see the surrogate victim as that stone initially rejected by the builders,
only to become the cornerstone of a whole mythic and ritualistic edifice?
Or as the key that opens any religious text, revealing its innermost
workings and rendering it forever accessible to the human intellect?

That incoherence traditionally attributed to religious ideas seems to be
particularly associated with the theme of the scapegoat. Frazer treats this
subject at length; his writing is remarkable for its abundance of descrip-
tion and paucity of explanation. Frazer refuses to concern himself with
the formidable forces at work behind religious significations, and his
openly professed contempt for religious themes protects him from all
unwelcome discoveries:

The notion that we can transfer our guilt and sufferings to some other being
who will bear them for us is familiar to the savage mind. It arises from a very
obvious confusion between the physical and the mental, between the material
and the immaterial. Because it is possible to shift a load of wood, stones, or
what not, from our own back to the back of another, the savage fancies that it
is equally possible to shift the burden of his pains and sorrows to another, who
will suffer them in his stead. Upon this idea he acts, and the result is an endless
number of very unamiable devices for palming off upon some one else the
trouble which a man shrinks from bearing himself. In short, the principle of
vicarious suffering is commonly understood and practised by races who stand
on a low level of social and intellectual culture.*

However, the disrepute in which he is held today is far from justifiable, for
few scholars have labored so diligently in the field or set forth their find-
ings with such admirable clarity. And many later writers have in effect
done little more than repeat in somewhat different form Frazer’s own
profession of ignorance.

Anyone who tries to subvert the sacrificial principle by turning it to
derision invariably becomes its unwitting accomplice. Frazer is no excep-
tion. His work contributes to the concealment of the violent impulse that
lurks within the rite of sacrifice. Such phrases as “physical loads” and
“bodily and mental ailments” recall nothing so much as the platitudes of
second-rate theologians; and Frazer treats the act of sacrificial substitution
as if it were pure fantasy, a nonphenomenon. Yet authors closer to
our time have done the same and with considerably less excuse, for the
Freudian notion of transference, inadequate as it is in some respects,
should at least have alerted us that something vital is missing from the
picture.

The modern mind still cannot bring itself to acknowledge the basic prin-
ciple behind that mechanism which, in a single decisive movement, cur-
tails reciprocal violence and imposes structure on the community.
Because of this willful blindness, modern thinkers continue to see religion
as an isolated, wholly fictitious phenomenon cherished only by a few
backward peoples or milieus. And these same thinkers can now project
upon religion alone the responsibility for a violent projection of violence
that truly pertains to all societies including our own. This attitude is seen
at its most flagrant in the writing of that gentleman-ethnologist Sir James
Frazer. Frazer, along with his rationalist colleagues and disciples, was per-
petually engaged in a ritualistic expulsion and consummation of religion
itself, which he used as a sort of scape-goat for all human thought. Frazer,
like many another modern thinker, washed his hands of all the sordid acts
perpetrated by religion and pronounced himself free of all taint of super-
stition. He was evidently unaware that this act of hand-washing has long
been recognized as a purely intellectual, nonpolluting equivalent of some
of the most ancient customs of mankind. His writing amounts to a fanat-
ical and superstitious dismissal of all the fanaticism and superstition he
had spent the better part of a lifetime studying.

The sacrificial character of this misunderstanding should remind us that
today, more than ever before, we will encounter resistance when we try
to rid ourselves of ignorance—even though the time has come for this
ignorance to yield to knowledge. This resistance is similar to what Freud
calls resistance, but far more formidable. We are not dealing with the sort
of repressed desires that everyone is really eager to put on public display,
but with the most tenacious myths of modernism; with everything, in
short, that claims to be free of all mythical influence.

What I have said of Freud holds true for all modes of modern thought;
most particularly for ethnology, to which Freud was irresistibly drawn.
That ethnology is alive today, when the traditional modes of interpret-
ation are sick unto death, is evidence of a new sacrificial crisis. This crisis is
similar but not identical to previous ones. We have managed to extricate
ourselves from the sacred somewhat more successfully than other
societies have done, to the point of losing all memory of the generative
violence; but we are now about to rediscover it. The essential violence
returns to us in a spectacular manner—not only in the form of a violent
history but also in the form of subversive knowledge. This crisis invites us,
for the very first time, to violate the taboo that neither Heraclitus nor
Euripides could ever quite manage to violate, and to expose to the light of
reason the role played by violence in human society.

Notes

1 Jensen, Mythes et cultes chez les peuples primitifs, pp. 77-83.

2 From I éait un petit navire, folkloric French song (ed).

3 Gernet, Anthropologie de la Gréce antique, p. 393.

4 J.G. Frazer, The Golden Bough, | vol., abridged (New York, 1963), p. 624.
Bibliography

Arrowsmith, William. “The Criticism of Greek Tragedy.” Tulane Drama Review 3,
no. 3 (1959).

Bataille, Georges. L’Erotisme. Paris: Minuit, 1965.

Bateson, Gregory; Jackson, Don D.; Haley, Jay; and Weakland, John. “Toward a
Theory of Schizophrenia.” In Steps to an Ecology of the Mind. New York:
Ballantine Books, 1972.

Battistini, Yves. Trois Présocratiques. Paris: Gallimard, 1970.

Beidelman, T. O. “Swazi Royal Ritual.” Africa 36 (1966): 373-405.

Benveniste, Emile. Le Vocabulaire des institutions indo-européennes. 2 vols. Paris:
Minuit, 1969.

Boas, Franz. “Tsimshian Mythology.” Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology
31, 185, no. 25.

Caillois, Roger. Man and the Sacred. Translated by Meyer Barash. Glencoe, IIL:
Free Press, 1960.

Canetti, Elias. Crowds and Power. Translated by Carol Stewart. New York: Viking
Press, 1966.

Chagnon, Napoleon. Yanomam6, the Fierce People. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1968.

Cook, P. A. W. “The Inqwala Ceremony of the Swazi.” Bantu Studies 4 (1930):
205-10.

Delcourt, Marie. Légendes et cultes des héros en Gréce. Paris, 1942.

——. Oedipe et la légende du conquérant. Paris, 1944.

Derrida, Jacques. “La Pharmacie de Platon.” In La Dissémination, pp. 71-179.
Paris: Seuil, 1968.

Diels, Hermann, and Kranz, Walter. Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. Berlin,
1934-35.

Dostoevski, Fiodor. The Double. In Three Short Novels of Dostoevsky. Translated by


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Constance Garnett, revised and edited by Avhram Yarmolinsky. New York:
Anchor Books, 1960.

Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger. London: Penguin Books, 1966.

Dumézil, Georges. “Lecture de Tite-Live.” In Horace et les Curiaces, Paris, 1942.

——. “Les Transformations du troisiéme triple.” In Cahiers pour l'Analyse 7 (1967).

——. Mythe et Epopée. Paris: Gallimard, 1968.

Durkheim, Emile. Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France, 1968.

Eliade, Mircea. Aspects du mythe. Paris: Gallimard, 1963.

——. Rites and Symbols of Initiation. New York: Harper & Row, 1965.

——. The Sacred and the Profane. New York: Harper & Row, 1961.

Elkin, A. P. The Australian Aborigines. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1964.

Euripides. Euripide. Edited and translated by Marie Delcourt-Curvers. Paris:
Gallimard, 1962.

Evans-Pritchard, E. E. The Nuer. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1940.

——. Social Anthropology and Other Essays. New York: Free Press, 1962.

Farber, Bernard, ed. Kinship and Family Organization. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1966.

Frazer, J. G. The Golden Bough. 1 vol., abridged. New York: Macmillan Co., 1963.

——. Totemism and Exogamy. 4 vols. London: Macmillan & Co., 1910.

Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works. Edited
and translated by James Strachey. 24 vols. London: Hogarth Press, 1953-66.

Gernet, Louis. Anthropologie de la Gréce antique. Paris: Maspero, 1968.

Gluckman, Max. Order and Rebellion in Tribal Africa. Glencoe IIl.: Free Press, 1960.

——.. Politics, Law, and Ritual in Tribal Society. New York: Mentor Books, 1968.

——. Rituals of Rebellion in South-East Africa. Manchester, 1954.

Harari, Josue, ed. Textual Strategies: Criticism in the Wake of Structuralism. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977.

Heidegger, Martin. Early Greek Thinking. Translated by David Farrell Krell and
Frank A. Capuzzi. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.

Henry, Jules. Jungle People. 1941. Reprint. New York: Vintage Books, 1964.

Heusch, Luc de. Essai sur le symbolisme de l'inceste royal en Afrique. Brussels, 1958.

——. “Aspects de la sacralité du pouvoir en Afrique.” In Le Pouvoir et le sacré.
Brussels: Institut de sociologie, 1962.

HOlderlin, Friedrich. Poems and Fragments. Translated by Michael Hamburger.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1967.

——. Lettres. Translated by D. Naville. In Oeuvres. Edited by Ph. Jaccottet. Paris:
Gallimard, 1962.

Hubert, Henri, and Mauss, Marcel. Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function. Translated by
W. D. Halls. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964.

Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955.

Huxley, Francis. Affable Savages. New York: Capricorn Books, 1966.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Jeanmaire, Henri. Dionysos: Histoire du culte de Bacchus. Paris: Payot, 1970.

——. “Le Traitement de la mania dans les ‘mystéres’ de Dionysos et des
Corybantes.” Journal de psychologie, 1949, pp. 64-82.

Jensen, Adolphe E. Mythes et cultes chez les peuples primitifs. Translated by
M. Metzger and J. Goffinet. Paris: Payot, 1954.

——. Myth and Cult among Primitive Peoples. Translated by Marianna Tax Cholsin
and Wolfgang Weissleder. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Kantorowicz, Ernst H. The King’s Two Bodies. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1957.

Kluckhohn, Clyde. “Recurrent Themes in Myth and Mythmaking.” In Myth and
Mythmaking. Edited by Henry A. Murray. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968.

Krige, H. J., and Krige, J. D. “The Lovedu of Transvaal.” In African Worlds.
London, 1954.

Kuper, H. “A Ritual of Kingship among the Swazi.” Africa 14 (1944):230—-56.

——. The Swazi: A South African Kingdom. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1964.

Lacan, Jacques. Ecrits. Paris: Seuil, 1966.

Laplanche, Jean. Hélderlin et la question du pére. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1961.

Laplanche, Jean, and Pontalis, J. B. Vocabulaire de la psychanalyse. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1967.

Leach, Edmund, ed. The Structural Study of Myth and Totemism. London: Tavistock,
1967.

Lévi, Sylvain. La Doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brahmanas. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France, 1966.

Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Translated by James
Harle Bell, John Richard von Sturmer, and Rodney Needham. Boston: Beacon
Press, 1969.

——. Structural Anthropology. Translated by Claire Jacobson and Brooke Grundfest.
New York: Basic Books, 1963.

——. Totemism. Translated by Rodney Needham. Boston: Beacon Press, 1963.

——. Tristes Tropiques. Translated by John Weightman and Doreen Weightman.
New York, 1975.

——. The Savage Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966.

——. The Raw and the Cooked. Translated by John Weightman and Doreen
Weightman. New York, 1969.

——. “La Geste d’Asdiwal.” Annuaire de I'école pratique des hautes études 6
(1958-59).

Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien. Primitive Mentality. Translated by Lilian A. Clare. New York,
1923.

Lorenz, Konrad. On Aggression. Translated by Marjorie Kerr Wilson. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1966.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Lowie, Robert, Primitive Society. New York: Liveright, 1970.

Maistre, Joseph de. Works. Translated by Jack Lively. New York, 1965.

Makarius, Laura. “Les Tabous du forgeron.” Diogéne 62 (April-June 1968).

——. “Le Mythe du trickster.” Revue d'histoire des religions 175, no. 2 (1969).

——. “Du Roi magique au roi divin.” Annales 25, no. 3 (1970):668—-98.

Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the West Pacific. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co.,
1961.

—. Crime and Custom in Savage Society. Totowa, N.J.: Littlefield, Adams &
Co., 1967.

——. The Father in Primitive Society. 1927. Reprint. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.,
1966.

—. Magic, Science, and Religion. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1954.

——. Sex and Repression in Savage Society. New York: Meridian Books, 1955.

Métraux, Alfred. Religions et magies indiennes d' Amérique du Sud. Paris: Gallimard,
1967.

——.La Religion des Tupinamba et ses rapports avec celles des autres tribus
Tupi-Guarini. Paris, 1928.

Nilsson, Martin P. A History of Greek Religion. New York: Norton, 1964.

Norbeck, E. “African Rituals of Conflict.” American Anthropologist 65
(1963):1254-79.

Otto, Rudolf. The Idea of the Holy. Translated by John W. Harvey. New York, 1958.

Otto, Walter. Dionysus: Myth and Cult. Translated by Robert B. Palmer.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965.

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. The Andaman Islanders. New York: Free Press, 1964.

——. Structure and Function in Primitive Society. New York: Free Press, 1965.

——. “The Study of Kinship Systems.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
71 (1941).

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., and Forde, Daryll, eds. African Systems of Kinship and
Marriage. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1950.

Rohde, Erwin. Psyche, Seelencult, und Unterblichkeits-glaube der Griechen. 1893.

Sharer, H. “Die Bedeutung des Menschenopfers im Dajakischen Totenkult.”
Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fiir Volkerkunde 10 (Hamburg, 1940).

Sousberge, L. “Etuis péniens et gaines de chasteté chez les ba-Pende.” Africa 24
(1954).

——. “Structures de parenteé et alliance d’aprés les formules Pende.” Mémoires de
l’Académie royale des sciences coloniales belges 4, no. 1 (1951).

Smith, W. Robertson. Lectures on the Religion of the Semites. 2d. ed. London,
1894.

——.. Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia. London, 1903.

Storr, Anthony. Human Aggression. New York: Bantam Books, 1968.

Thompson, Stith, ed. Tales of the North American Indians. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1968.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Turner, Victor. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. 1967. Reprint.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1970.

——. The Drums of Affliction. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968.

——. The Ritual Process. Chicago: Aldine, 1969.

Vaillant, George C. The Aztecs of Mexico. New York: Pelican Books, 1950.

Van Gennep, Arnold. Les Rites de passage. Paris: Nourry, 1909.

Vernant, Jean-Pierre. Mythe et pensée chez les Grecs. Paris: Maspero, 1966.

——. “Ambiguité et renversement: sur la structure enigmatique d’Oedipe Roi.” In
Echanges et communications. Edited by Jean Pouillon and Pierre Maranda. The
Hague: Mouton, 1970.

Wilson, Monica. Rituals of Kinship among the Nyakyusa. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1957.


Index


Abraham and Isaac 4

Abschattungen (aspects) 211

adaptation, resistance to 41

Ajax 9-10

Alcestis (Euripides) 50, 68

alternation: love and hate 173;
madness 165; thymos 163; tragedy
158-60

ambivalence, Freud

28, 88-9

Anaximander 323

ancestor worship 268-9

Andaman Islanders 16-17

Andromache (Euripides) 84-5,
162-3

anger: Oedipal myth 72-3; tragic hero
72

animal sacrifice
287-8

animals: duality 207; initiates as 299;
relationship with man 2-3; sacrifice
102-4, 111, 210-11, 287-8; totems
207; violence 2

antagonists: as doubles 168, 170, 172;

191-3
anathema

102-4, 111, 210-11,

equilibrium 167-8; perspective
168-9

Anthropologie de la Gréce Antique
(Gernet) 313

anthropology 250-1

antifestival 129-30

Apollo, as prophet 141

Aristotle 77-8, 310; katharsis 306-8

atheism 6

Aztecs (Peru) 316

Bacchae, The (Euripides) 134-50,
152-3, 160-1, 171-2, 174, 264

bacchanal 134-5; demystification
145; differentiation destroyed
135-6; duality 146-7; function 141;
loss of distinction between god,
man and animal 136-7; sacrificial
crisis 135; women 148-50

bacchantes 135-6

Bataille, Georges 233-4

Bateson, Gregory 156

Beidelman, T.O. 115

Benveniste, Emile 161-2, 277-9

blood: duality 38-9; menstrual 34-9;
ritual 111; significance 38; and
violence 37-8

blood feuds 15, 17, 55-6

Boas, Franz 260-1

Bororo (Brazil and Bolivia)
255

bouphonia 103, 322

Bromios (aspect of Dionysus) 142

brothers 4, 61; Cain and Abel 4, 64; as
enemies 64-6, 67, 69, 75, 113, 167,
223; Jacob and Esau 5-6, 7, 64, 188;
in myth 64; Old Testament 4-7, 64,
69, 188; sacrificial crisis 66-7

149,

Caillois, Roger 128
Cain and Abel 4, 64
Cambridge Ritualists 101, 308
Canelos (Ecuador) 328-9
cannibalism 289-95, 324n;
parameters 294
Cape people (Ghana)
capital punishment
castration 261
catharsis 31, 66, 86, 98, 104, 107, 171,
303; festivals 128-9; see also
katharsis
Ceram Islanders

130
313

105

Chagnon, Napoleon 148-9
chance 149, 329-32

Chief Pestilence 257-60

child, imitation of parents 156-7
children, as disciples 184

China 8-9

Chomsky, Noam 243-4

chorus 78, 164-5

Chukchi (Siberia) 17, 26-9
clyster 305

collective murder 102, 226-8, 248,
259; hypothesis 204-5; hypothesis
of substitution 3-6, 102; social
benefits 99, 248; sparagmos 139,

140, 211, 259, 267; supernatural
aspects 99

comic personalities in myth 267

communities, relationship to the
sacred 281-3

conjunction 248

consciousness, Freud’s philosophy
of 187

contagion, see contamination

contamination 28, 29, 32-3, 51, 272,
297; Oedipus 79; by twins 59-60;
by violence 31

contests 99, 113, 152, 155-6, 328-9

crisis of distinctions, see sacrificial crisis

critical cycle 250

cultural heritage 245

cultural order 56-8, 248-9

cultural prohibitions 230-3

cycles of life 270

cyclothymia 164, 167-8

Darwin, Charles, and incest
prohibitions 227

dead, worship of, see ancestor worship

death 329; good omen 261;
resurrection 255; ritualization
270-1

Death-watch (Genet)

death wish (thanatos)

decadence 133-4

definition, inscholarship 332

deities: disease 30; primitive 265;
redundancy 44; role in sacrifice 7;
unreality in modern world 6;
violence 281

Delcourt-Curvers, Marie 122n

demystification 217-8; bacchanal
145; judiciary 24-5

Derrida, Jacques 311-12

desire: conflict 155; Freud 120,
179-86, 191, 193-4, 216; mimesis
155-8, 179-84, 190-3, 230, 292;

patricide-incest 193-4; violence
154, 185-6

destiny 80, 158

desymbolism, see desymbolization

desymbolization 65-6, 68

diasparagmos, see sparagmos

differentiation 114-15, 167-8;
abandoned in festivals 127;
destroyed in bacchanal 135-6;
within families 67, 79; living and
dead 269; loss by violence 258-9;
man, god and animals 136-7;
modern societies 199, 216; in myth
78; Oedipus the King (Sophocles)
74-5, 80; rites of passage 296-7;
sexual 150; society 52-4; tragedy
58-9; violence 58-9

Dinka (Sudan) 3, 7-8, 176, 287-8,
293; sacrificial ceremonies 102-3

Dionysos (Jeanmaire) 324—5n

Dionysus 134-50, 264-5, 332-3

discrimination 248

disintegration, social 134-7, 200

dismemberment, see sparagmos

displacement 2-3, 4, 14, 21, 87, 292;
see also transference

divine intervention

Divine Right of Kings

divinity, contest for 160-1

Dostoevsky, Fyodor 170

double bind 156-8, 188-9

Double, The (Dostoevsky) 170

doubles 83-4; antagonists 168, 170,
172; Dionysus and Pentheus
136-7, 140-1; see also monstrous
double

drugs 255-6

duality: animals 207; bacchanal
146-7; blood 38-9; monsters
170-3; pharmakos 100; primitive
deities 265; sacrifice 1, 21; sacrificial
crisis 80; sacrificial victim 41;




science and non-science 246; victim
90, 115; violence 38-9

Dumézil, Georges 44

Durkheim, Emile 128, 322

dying, as surrogacy 269

Ego and the Id, The (Freud)

Electra (Euripides) 11

elementary family 235-6

Eliade, Mircea 292

Empedocles 45, 173-4

empiricism 33, 91

enemy brothers 64-6, 67, 69, 75,
113, 167, 223

epidemic: allegory 80, 87, 135;
sacrificial crisis 81; Thebes 87

equilibrium, between antagonists
167-8

ethnocentrism 244-5

ethnology 58, 244-5, 335-6

Euripides 46, 49, 138-40, 264; see also
specific plays

Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 3

evil 135

exclusion

exogamy 117, 243, 251-2

exorcism 131-3

expiation 4

family: differentiation 67, 79;
distinctions 237-8; elementary
235-6; levels of relationship 238;
likeness 62—4; nuclear 239, 242

father figure 215

Father in Primitive Psychology, The
(Malinowski) 62-4, 196

father-son relationship: Freud 180-7,
189; rivalry 186

festivals: catharsis 128-9;
differentiation 127; function 128;
replacing sacrifice 131; restoration
of social order 130; sacrificial crisis

345
346



festivals—continued
127-8, 318; social norms
abandoned 127, 207; uncontrolled
violence 134

fool, relationship to king 13

formalism 247

fortune 159,329

Frazer, Sir James 29, 101, 130-2,
334-5

Freud, Sigmund 97, 120-2, 179-84,
335; ambivalence 191-3; desire
120, 179-86, 191, 193-4, 216;
father-son relationship 180-7, 189;
identification 180-4, 189-90, 192;
inadequacy of theory 195-6; incest
222-5; and myth 187; Oedipus
complex 179-84, 190-1; Oedipus
myth 89, 194; philosophy of
consciousness 187; rivalry 195;
sacrifice as simulation 212;
superego 189-91, 194-5; tragedy
215, 216, 218-9

funeral rites 269, 328-9

games, in ritual 328-9
genderroles 136

generative mechanism 328
generative process 249
generative violence 260, 273, 312
Genet, Jean 293

genitalia, violence towards 103
Gernet, Louis 313-14, 322, 331-2
gods, asmonsters 267

Golden Bough, The (Frazer) 130

Greek mythology 4, 132

Greek tragedy 15-16, 45-6, 49; masks
176-8; see also specific plays

Group Psychology and the Analysis of the
Ego (Freud) 180, 183, 186

guilt: attribution 82, 87; basis for
punishment 27-8; Oedipal myth
77

hallucinations 170-5, 302

Hegel, G.W.E 322

Heidegger, Martin 215

Henry, Jules 55-6

Heracles (Euripides) 49-50; inversion
of sacrificial act 42-4

Heraclitus, origins of myth and
religion 92-3

Hestia 322, 332

Heusch, Luc de

H6lderlin,

Friedrich 48, 165-7

Homer 161-2

Horace (Corneille)

Horatius 44

Hubert, Henri 1, 3-4, 7, 11, 94-5,
99

hubris 74, 137, 144, 276; blasphemy
142

Huizinga, Johan 329

human sacrifice, compared to
animal 10-11

humanist criticism 309

Husserlian phenomenology 211

Huxley, Francis 290

Hymen 79

hypotheses: collective murder 204-5;
original violence 117; sacrificial
crisis 133, 260; substitution 3-6,
102; surrogate-victim 118, 326-7,
333; testing 109; violent unanimity
133

hysteria 109, 113

idealist philosophy 273

identification, Freud 180-4, 189-92

identity, reciprocity 75-6

Ifugao (Philippines) 17, 26

Hiad (Homer) 162

incest 79-80, 88, 117-21; Freud
204-5, 222-5; prohibitions 227
(Darwin) 238-9, 251-2;
psychoanalysis 120-1; ritual 128;
royal 109-12, 114-19, 315, 319;
sacrificial crisis 79, 80, 118

Incwala ceremony (Swaziland)
114-15, 129-30, 265, 282, 304, 318

10, 60

inversion 43, 215

Jon (Euripides) 39

infanticide

Iroquois (North America) 257
Isaac 4-6

Islam 4

Jacob and Esau 5-6, 7, 64, 188
Jeanmaire, Henri 280, 324—-5n
Jensen, Adolphe 96-7, 329

Jonah 330-1

judiciary: absence in primitive
societies 16-18, 19; basis of
civilization 20, 23; demystification
24-5; evolution 22; impartiality 23;
origins 313; punishment 313-14;
religious roots 24; revenge 16, 21,
23-4; sacrifice 18-19; similarity to
revenge and sacrifice 25

Jukun (Nigeria) 113

Jungle People (Henry) 55-6

Kafka, Franz 200

Kaingang (Brazil) 55-6, 106, 134

Kantorowicz, Ernst 320

katharma 302-4, 306

Katharsis 303-4, 306; see also
catharsis

Kayans (Borneo) 328

king: African societies 66; and fool
12-13; sacred 266, 283-5, 287;
sacrifice 12-13, 124n

king of fools 128

King's Two Bodies, The (Kantorowicz)
320

kinship: biological 237; biological
relationships 241; languages 244;



rules 243; systems 236-8; taboos
238; Western society 250
Kluckhohn, Clyde 64
Kratos 278-9
Krige, H. J. and J. D.
kudos 161-3
Kuper, H. 115

La Pensée sauvage (Lévi-Strauss) 7

“La pharmacie de Platon” (Derrida)
311-12

Lacan, Jacques

language 277-9

lapidation 99, 124n

Laplanche, Jean 165-6

Lévi-Strauss, Claude 7, 235-7, 255-6;
biological relationships 241; kinship
243; nuclear family 239

Lévy Bruhl, Lucien 12, 30, 253-4

lexicography 278-80

libido 181, 183

Lienhardt, Godfrey 3, 7-8, 102-4,
176, 287-8

life cycles 270

literature, conflict with science 58

lithobolia 99

logic of sacrifice 28

Lorenz, Konrad 2

lottery 332

love and hate, alternation

Lowie, Robert 17, 26

madness, alternation 165
Maistre, Joseph de 2-3, 11
Makarius, Laura 38
Malinowski, Bronislaw
196-8, 227-8
marginality: of
metal workers

18, 62-4,

275-7; of victims

12-13
masks 176-8
masochism 153-4




matrilineal society 62-4

Mauss, Marcel 1, 3-4, 7, 11, 94-5,
99

Medea (Euripides) 9-11

mediation 6, 282-3

medicine: as metaphor 34; and
monsters 170; ritual basis 303-5

menstruation 34-9

metal, assacred 275-7

metal workers, marginalized 275-7

metamorphosis 259-60, 264-5, 299

metaphysics 96

method, comparative

Métraux, Alfred 275

Milton, John 309-10

mimesis 107-8, 140, 179-84, 188-9,
190, 198-9; in children 156-7;
desire 155-8, 179-84, 190-3, 230,
292; Freud 188-9; possession 175;
ritual 66; rivalry 194; violence 32,
50, 86

mimetic desire, see mimesis

327

misunderstanding 7, 11; religion
327-8

model-disciple relationship 179-87;
rivalry 185

modern society: differentiation 199,
216; Oedipus complex 200-1

monarch, as sacrifice 12-13,
109-14, 124n

monarchy 315; Ancien Régime 319;
sacred 109

monsters 169-73, 266-7; duality
170-3; Empedocles 173; Greek gods
as 267; and medicine 170; totemism
209

monstrous double
286-7, 290

Moses and Monotheism (Freud)
229-30

Mossi (Burkina Faso} 112

mother, desire for 180-3

170-4, 265-6,

murder: collective 102, 226-8,
248, 259; religion 208-9; restraint
15

mutilation 257-8, 261

myth 67-8; basis of tragedy 78, 216;
comic personalities 267;
differentiation 78; elaboration 70;
etiological 98, 112; Freud 187;
narrative forms 99; Oedipus 100,
194; origins 94-5; psychoanalysis
217-8; sexuality 121

nature, as basis of rites 101
Ndembu (Zambia) 8, 167
Ngadju-Dayak (Borneo) 105-6
Nietzsche, Friedrich 199-200
1984 (Orwell) 295

Nioka (Democratic Republic of

Congo) 125n
Niquas (Mexico) 260-1
Njumba (Zambia) 124n

nominalism 207
nondifferentiation, see differentiation
nuclear family 239, 242

Nuer (Sudan) 3, 12

Nyakusa (Tanzania) 60
Nyoro (Uganda) 113
Odyssey, The (Homer) 6-7

Oedipus 87-92, 111, 264, 329; anger
72-3; contamination 79; Freud 89,
194; incest 79-80; katharma 306;
myth 100, 194, 266; patricide 78-9;
scapegoat 81-2; surrogate 81-2;
Totem and Taboo (Freud) 218-20

Oedipus at Colonus (Sophocles)

90-2, 264

Oedipus complex 179-84, 190-1;
modern societies 200-1; post-
Freudian psychoanalysis 195;
primitive societies 196-7; source of
confusion 198-9
Oedipus the King (Sophocles) 48-9,
50-1, 68, 72-83, 87-92, 152-3,
168-9, 309; see also Oedipus

Old Testament: brothers 4-7, 64, 69,
188; prophets 45, 69

outside perspective 168-9

parents, projection onto children
185

parricide 88

patriarchy 199-200

patricide 75, 77, 78-80

patricide-incest desire 193-4

Pende (Democratic Republic of

Congo) 125n
Pentheus 135-50
peripeteia 159,165

perspective: antagonists 168-9;
outside 168-9

phallicsymbolism 149

pharmakon 100, 303, 311-2

pharmakos 9,12, 99-101, 302-3

philosophy 311; classical tragedy 45;
consciousness (Freud) 187

Phoenician Women, The (Euripides)
47-8, 49, 160

physiology of violence 2

plague, see epidemic

Plato 308-11

Plutarch 304

Poetics (Aristotle) 77-8, 306-8

pollution, see contamination

positivism 132, 333-4

possession 175, 175-6

pre-Socratics 45, 173

primitive deities, duality 265

primitive horde 227-8

primitive mentality 12, 26-7,
253-4

“primitive” psychology 20

primitive religion 21, 85, 265,
326



prohibitions, cultural 230-3

projection, by parents 185

prophets: Old Testament 45, 69;
Tiresias 74-5

Psyche (Rohde) 142-3

psychiatry 164, 169-70

psychoanalysis 116, 179-80,
186-7, 188, 194, 200-1, 333;
attitude to Malinowski 196-7;
incest 120-1; and myth 217-8;
post-Freudian 195; and Sophocles
217-8; Totem and Taboo (Freud) 205,
220-1

psychology 57; “primitive” 20

punishment, judicial 313-14

purification 43, 302; parents of twins
60

Purifications (Empedocles) 45-6,
173-4
Radcliffe-Brown, A.R. 16-17,

235-8

rationalism 279, 309, 335

Raw and the Cooked, The (Lévi-
Strauss) 255

reciprocity: identity 75—6; patricide
78-9; tragedy 75-6; violence 67, 69,
73, 257-8

redemption 91

regicide 78

religion: basis of judiciary 24; basis of
society 233, 273-4; effects of
disintegration 133; error 249;
factual basis 109; maintenance of
order 21; masks 176-8; miraculous
nature of victim 90-1; and murder
208-9; origins 94-5; pre-Socratic
thought 173-4; primitive 21, 85;
ritual 321; role in society 19, 52, 58,
143-4, 327; sacrificial basis 94-5;
surrogate victim 322; and violence
21, 85-6, 92

349
350



religious thought 327

repetition: Oedipal myth 266; sacrifice
280-1

reproduction 238, 240

responsibility, collective 26
resurrection 255
retribution, law of 274-5

revenge 15-6, 19, 21-2, 28;
compensation 21; displacement 21;
and sacrifice 13-4; similarity to
judiciary and sacrifice 25

Richard Il (Shakespeare) 320

ridicule 267

rites: basis in nature 101; funeral 269,
328-9; generative violence 318

rites of passage 296-301;
characteristics 301; differentiation
296-7; purpose 299; sacrificial crisis
298-9; social norms abandoned
299; social stability 300-1;
Tupinamba (Brazil) 299

Rites of Passage (Van Gennep) 296

ritual: basis of social institutions 321;
blood 111; cultural similarity 95;
death 270-1; festivals 127; function
of 19-20; games 99, 113, 152,
155-6, 328-9; incest 128;
interpreting 44-5; and medicine
303-5; mimesis 66; religion 321;
social stability 300

ritual curses 103

ritual impurity 29-31, 33; cleansed by
sacrifice 37-8; menstruation 34-9;
protoscience 30; royal incest
110-12; twins 60-1

ritual possession 175-6

Ritual Process, The (Turner) 52

ritual sacrifice, repetition 280-1

ritualistic mentality 103

rivalry 154-7; father-son
relationship 186; Freud 195;
mimesis 194; model-disciple

relationship 185

Rohde, Erwin 142-3

royal incest 109-12, 114-19, 315,
319

Rwandan culture 111

sacralization 162

sacred, the 32, 61, 254, 271-3; and
king 109, 266, 283-5, 287;
relationship to communities
281-3

sacrifice: ancient religions 210; basis
of religion 94—5; collective
participation 105; as
commemoration 108; duality 1, 21;
functions 14, 18; Greek myth 132;
and judiciary 18-19; king 12-13,
109-14, 124n; logic 28; as
nourishment 281; origins 97;
replaced by festivals 131; role of
deities 7; similarity to judiciary and
revenge 18-19, 25; simulation
(Freud) 212; social basis 8-9, 18,
45; and social order 100, 113;
symbolism 1-2

sacrificial crisis 46, 51-2, 55, 57, 60,
70, 258, 297; bacchanal 135;
brothers 66-7; duality 80; epidemic
81; festivals 318; festive
commemoration 127-8; incest 79,
80, 118; patricide 80; symbolism
1-2; symmetry 65; tragedy 68, 75;
twins 60, 61, 66

sacrificial preparation 287-8, 293

sacrificial substitution 10-11, 170-1,
284-6; see also hypothesis of
substitution

sadism 153-4

Samson Agonistes (Milton) 309-10

scapegoat 81-2, 84, 86-7, 101, 104,
115, 267, 289-91; basis of religion
317; religious theme 334
science 245-6; conflict with literature
58; inadequacy 36; primitive basis
306; and religion 98

science and non-science, duality 246

scientific research 95-8

sexual differentiation 150

sexuality: legitimate 231-2;
menstruation 35-7; in myth 121;
and the sacred 35; taboos 36;
violence 35-7, 121-2

Shakespeare, William 53-5, 319-20

shamans 87, 176; initiation
ceremonies 301-5

siblings 61-2

silwane (savagery) 114, 283

Smith, W. Robertson, totemism 208,
209-10

social basis of sacrifice 8-9, 18, 45

social institutions: basis in ritual 321;
maintenance of order 20-1;
threatened by violence 75

social norms abandoned in festivals
127, 207

social order: restored by festivals 130;
and sacrifice 100, 113

social suicide 56-7

society: basis in religion 233, 273-4;
critical cycle 250; differentiation
52-4; types 320-1

sociology 57

Socrates 310-11

Sophists 311

Sophocles 49, 72, 138, 216, 264; and
psychoanalysis 217-18; see also
specific plays

sophrosyne 74

sparagmos (dismemberment) 139, 140,
211, 259, 267

Sphinx 266

stereotypes 49

stichomythia 47, 160

stoning 99, 124n



Storr, Anthony 2

“Structural Analysis in Linguistics and
in Anthropology” (Lévi-Strauss)
247

structural differentiation 52

structuralism 59, 241, 251-2, 253-5,
321

substitution, collective 8

superego 189-91, 194-5

Supplices (Euripides) 64—5

“Sur le symbolisme politique: le Foyer
commun” (Gernet) 331-2

surrogacy 2, 4, 81-2, 84, 87, 92, 106;
Oedipus 81-2; psychological
mechanisms 106; religion 322;
social mechanisms 106-7; totemism
208

surrogate-victim mechanism 97-8,
312

symbolicthought 246-8

symbolism of sacrifice 1-2

symmetry: sacrificial crisis 65; tragedy
49-50, 65, 73-4, 76, 137-8

taboos 30, 34, 36, 128, 238

technological weapons 252-3

Tenetehara (Brazil) 255-6

thymos 163-4

tobacco 255-6

tobajara 294

Totem and Taboo (Freud) 97; challenge
to psychoanalysis 220-1; criticism
of 204-6; ethnological response
205-6; incest prohibitions 204-5,
222-5; as literary analysis 221-2;
Oedipus 218-20; psychoanalytic
response 205; theory of collective
murder 204-5; tragedy 213-14

totemism 206-10; monsters 209;
surrogacy 208

tragedy 58; adaptation of rites 308;
alternation 158-60; differentiation

351


tragedy—continued
58-9; Freudian interpretation 215,
216, 218-19; and myth 216;
reciprocity 75-6; as ritual 307; role
of chorus 78; sacrificial crisis 68, 75;
symmetry 49-50, 65, 73-4, 76,
137-8; Totem and Taboo (Freud)
213-14

tragic guilt 219

tragic hero: anger 72; sacrificial victim
307

tragic impartiality (H6lderlin) 48-9

transference 5-6, 106, 335; see also
displacement

Trobriand Islanders 62-4, 196-8

Troilus and Cressida (Shakespeare)
53-4, 70

Tsimshian (Canada) 257-61, 294

Tupinamba (Brazil) 316; cannibalism
289-94; rites of passage 299

Turner, Victor 7-8, 52,115, 306

twins 59-61, 65-7; contamination
59-60; purification of parents 60;
sacrificial crisis 60, 61, 66; social
privilege 61

Uitoto (Colombia) 328

Ulysses (Troilus and Cressida)

unanimity 105-6, 133, 209; in
bacchanalian violence 139;
spontaneous 314

uncle, in role of father 197

unity, of community 82-3, 133

53-4

vaccination 305

Van Gennep, Arnold 296

vendettas 15,17, 55-6

vengeance. see revenge

Vernant, Jean-Pierre 123n

victim: adopted into community
292-3; animal 2-3; arbitrary choice
271; as catalyst 90; duality 90, 115;

function 100; links with
community 41-2; marginality 12-3,
286-7; miraculous nature 90-1;
purity 29; sacred 1, 285-6; selection
12, 132; status 12; surrogate 2, 4,
81-2, 84, 87, 92, 106; veneration
103-4

victim, animal, relationship with
man 2-3

violence: in animals 2; blood 37-8;
collective 85-6; contamination 31;
deity 281; and desire 154, 185-6;
differentiation 58-9; displacement
2-3; duality 38-9; and kudos
161-3; legitimation 25; limitless
252-3; loss of differentiation 258-9;
masculine relationships 50-1;
mimesis 32, 50, 86; mythic themes
256; physiology 2; purification 61;
realm of Dionysus 141; reciprocity
67, 69, 73, 257-8; religion 21, 85-6,
92; responses to 50; and sexuality
35-7, 121-2; spontaneous 104-5;
unanimity 84, 85; uncontrolled in
festivals 134

violent unanimity 133, 327; basis of
religion 92

war 20, 43-4, 262, 294

women: Dionysiac cult 148; exchange
294-5; quasi-sacred 150; rarely
sacrificed 13; structure of society
149; substituted for men in
bacchanal 148-50

Women of Trachis (Sophocles)
201-3

44,

Xipe-Totec (Aztec deity) 265

Yadjour-Veda 105

Yanomam6 (Brazil and Venezuela)
134, 148-9

